The Project Gutenberg eBook of Keetje, by Neel Doff

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Keetje

Author: Neel Doff

Release Date: April 17, 2021 [eBook # 65096]

Language: French

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Laurent Vogel and the Digitale Bibliotheek voor de
             Nederlandse Letteren at www.dbnl.org

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KEETJE ***





  NEEL DOFF

  KEETJE


  PARIS
  Literary and Artistic Publishing Company
  PAUL OLLENDORFF LIBRARY
  50, CHAUSSÉE D'ANTIN, 50

  All rights reserved




This book follows on from

DAYS OF FAMINE AND DISTRESS




--Keetje, my God, the little ones haven't been able to go to school for two
days: how would you like ... without eating?

--Hey, I said.

And I got up from my old sofa, and took a whole coat rack
prostitute's paraphernalia, which a girl who died of tuberculosis had left
with us. I put on the boots with excessive heels, the dress for three
ruffles and trolling, a line of black under the eyes, two red patches
on the cheeks and bold red on the lips. I raised all my
hair on the crown of my head to make me look older, because
in the dating houses, for fear of the police,
chased me away when they saw my sixteen-year-old face. A
hat, shawl, I didn't have one.

While waiting, I was watching my mother ... Will she come with me? I will not
not alone; no, for nothing in the world ...

When it was time to go out, I was looking at her. Only then did she put
hastily his cap and shawl.

In the street, I watched him from the side. Here she comes with me ...
What a shame that a mother like this ... in town she will walk behind
me, she will look in the same windows; if I am accosted, she will do
pretending not to know me; when i follow a man, she
I will follow suit so closely that you will notice that she is accompanying me;
then she will wait for me to go out ... Ah! it's foul ... and I lay down
the way she was panting.

--Oh! Keetje ...

--Ah! what are you doing here? go away, you disgust me.

And I was ahead of her.

Soon I was turning around. Oh, if she'd come home and let me go
alone ... I looked for her along the shops in the suburb, and
saw her distraught, trying to catch up with me ... What an abomination ...
Doesn't she feel the abjection of what she is doing? Oh, that I
hate, that I despise her ... And I was waiting for her.

--Ah! Keetje, she gasped. And she wiped her forehead with her hand
sweat.

--What are you doing next to me, when I go out to be the whore? ...
that you should follow me, are you a mother? Ah! Ugh!

She looked at me with hasty blinking of her eyelids, was
very small, avoided brushing against me.

In the center of town, I was still ahead of her, but whispered to her not to
not stray too far, and, terrified of the chore that awaited me, I
was shaking his hand.

- You hear me, don't go too far!

And the soliciting peregrination began.

On my return, my whole arrogance had fallen. She supported me, and me
drove like a blind man past the closed shops.

--Oh! mother, I can't go any further on these boots ... these heels ...
Oh! how bad my toes are! and my kidneys ... every step, so
on tiptoes, gives me a shock in the kidneys ...
take away ...

- No, my little girl, you would catch glass in the feet.
Let's sit down on these steps for a bit.

--Ah! what fatigue ... five hours, we walked five hours ...

- Yes, tomorrow you will sleep all morning ... Let's walk a little longer;
there is an open shop there; I will buy food, and you will have
also hot coffee.

I left my dress lying around in the dust, I wiped my red,
and whimpered as I leaned on her and held me with the other hand
storefronts. I said nothing of the disgust of unknown males, of the desire to
insult them every time I had to indulge me, with the very rage of
bite them that grabbed me when they grabbed my body. What
strange modesty between the two of us, never to touch on this question ...

At the bottom of the stairs, she whispered:

- Let's go up slowly, so as not to awaken the children.

I fell on my sofa. She lit the fire, put on water
boil, then took off my boots and pulled the ends of my stockings a little.

--Ah! that it hurts, that it hurts ...

She undressed me, laid me down and covered me.

- Immediately, you will have coffee.

And she came with a full cup, an egg and toast and me
she was eating without thinking of herself.

- There, my sweet, now you are going to sleep.

She covered me and still spread her shawl over my feet.

Sleep! ... it was a question of that for me. All the nausea of
hours spent watering me: I fidgeted and contorted,
revolt.

--Sleep, my sweet, tomorrow you will have more coffee; then i will make them for you
cards. Sleep, my sweet.

And I fell asleep; but I was so pale and contracted, she told me on
next day, that she had spent the night going from her bed to my sofa.
When I woke up, she was leaning over me.

--Ah!

And she brought the hot coffee with the toast and the egg; and she me
held my mug, and adjusted a pillow behind my back.

- I'll make you the cards.

She spread the cards out on my lap.

--Sept, a letter ... seven, with good tidings ... seven, he is a
young dark-haired man ...

--But I don't like browns. Hou, I don't like any ... Hou ...

And with a blow of the knees, I made fly the charts on the ground.

--With your nonsense ... a letter, it will be an exploit of the owner; and
the brown man, a brute of a bailiff ... And you, you neglect everything for these
nonsense, you believe in that ... Ugh, is it possible! what a mother!
Come on, let's take care of the little ones' dinner: it will be better.

I jumped out of bed, and her eyes blinked, and her gaze begged me,
but nothing to do: I was overcome with all my disgust, with all my
resentment, the venom of which I threw at him in a continuous stream.




KEETJE


It was the evening of Sainte-Catherine. I wandered, with my mother ten paces away
behind me, down town. When I believed a man to me
was watching, I was turning into an adjacent street, hoping he would have me
followed.

From time to time, in front of the pastry shop windows, my mother
would join us, and we would look at the Sainte-Catherine cakes spread out.
They were heart-shaped, or square, or round, with glazes of
white or pink sugar; the inscription meandered there in golden letters.

`` I can call myself Catherine, '' said my mother, `` I won't have any of it.
that ... Keetje, what would the little ones say if we came home loaded
both of cakes?

--This snow which penetrates me everywhere annoys me, I look like a
scarecrow ... How do you expect me to find a man? I replied.

And I resumed my excess stroll.

Rue des Bouchers, a gentleman accosted me: it was a Walloon that I
barely understood.

- Come spend the night with me, little one.

--At night ... If you want to give me ten francs ...

- It's okay, come on.

I followed him down a street in the old town. I would have liked to warn
my mother that it was for the night, but I couldn't.

In the dark, he took me up to the annex. He lit a lamp, and
we found ourselves in a small bedroom with a very large
bed. He gave me two pennies which I tied in my
tissue.

He took me without preamble, mechanically, seeming to be on duty
as much as me. Then he buried his face in the pillow. We do not
were not saying anything. He rolled onto his back. His eyes rested on a
photograph of a woman hanging at the foot of the bed: it was the type of
fat Flemish bourgeois from the lower part of town, who looked at us
smiling.

As the man saw that I was following his gaze:

"My wife," he said.

He added in "Marollian":

- "Duud" ... dead.

And he put his face back on the pillow.

He got up, put on his pants, and motioned for me to get up too; he
added the gesture of eating. I put on my soaked ulster and put on my
ankle boots. He guided me up the dark staircase into the cellar, then he
tells me to wait. He struck a match and lit a small lamp.
oil.

We were in a cellar kitchen. He showed me a chair, took a
terrine with meat frozen in a brown sauce, cut bread,
uncorked a bottle of beer, and we had supper. It was excellent. He
cut me slice of bread on slice of bread, and put
meat on my plate as soon as my piece was eaten. He is
watched curiously engulf, but made no thought. He
took the little lamp, and we went upstairs. He put a finger to his mouth
and breathed:

- Hush ... for the "girl" ... [1] she sleeps.

  [1] Maid.

And he pointed to the top of the house.

He led me upstairs into a large bedroom, the walls of which
were lined with drawers, and drawer units were in the
middle.

He went to the furniture and opened the drawers. I had an exclamation of
joy and surprise: they were filled with artificial flowers.

`` Manufacturer ... '' he said, putting a finger to his chest.

He opened more, and there appeared garlands of roses, stakes
carnations, camellias, - I learned the names later while roaming the market
of flowers from the Grand'Place, - then flowers with a drop of dew
glass in the heart and on the petals, and leaves misted with
Grey.

The man sadly opened the drawers, and I, in ecstasy, touched
the flowers at your fingertips. He pulled out another one, and I couldn't
hold back a cry of admiration. Garlands of flowers, in chalices of
white satin with pink, mauve or red tips, spread out on paper
silk: they were, to my taste, the prettiest of all.

--One for you, choose.

I took the one with the purple ends.

"Belles-de-jour," he said, wrapping them in tissue paper.

We went back to bed; he told me to sleep and did the same.

It was still dark when he woke me up and waved me
dress me up.

`` The employees will come, '' he whispered, leading me to the door of
the street, which he closed very gently on me.

I didn't really know where I was; the street was steeply sloping, the
Ice was dragging me backwards, the fog froze on the way
and made me swallow grains of ice. However, I ended up with the
Grand'Place: from there, I knew how to find my way home. I bought
food in the first shop I saw open. When I got to
home it was only six o'clock.

--It's you, my mother exclaimed, thank God! ... I waited until two
hours in front of this house; if i heard you scream i would have
roused the neighborhood ... Do you have any money?

I gave him eight francs, I had spent two francs on
food.

--I also received a flower.

And I showed it to them.

"You see how easy it is," said my father. We all have to eat, and
you can sleep all day, if you want to, and go out tonight
with the beautiful flower on your hat ...

I felt myself fade; he saw it and was silent.

The little ones, on their straw mattresses, ate greedily. My mother had
cut the toast for Hein who had to go to work; her him
poured out a hot cup of coffee which he drank while standing, pouring it into
his saucer. She also gave me a cup, and I started sewing
my garland of belles-de-jour on my sordid hat.




--I will have you pose, one session, if you can stand, for three
hours at least, for a drapery, without taking a rest.

- Certainly I can: I want it and will do it.

--So take off your clothes, we'll start right away.

The painter pinned the drapery on me, wrapping my head in
a corner of the fabric, forming a cap. I took the pose, standing, my arm
left on the back of an armchair, the right arm brought in front of the
chest with hand on left wrist, head strongly turned
above the right shoulder. He took his palette, turned a few
moments around me, and began to paint feverishly.

- Especially do not move the head, the fabric makes a superb fold on the
neck.

I soon had a stiff neck, which was causing me tightness throughout
the head. After an hour, he said to me:

--But you pose admirably, little one ... There are only women
nervous for energy; several models put me in
embarrassment with this study, and I need it for my big picture.

- Did you notice I'm nervous?

--It's not long to see: your eyes, despite their light color, are
worried, and your hands must close like vices, when you don't
don't want to open them.

I had been up for two and a half hours, and I had the feeling
to be buried in the ground, when the servant came to say something to
the painter's ear.

--Saperlotte, what boredom! I must finish this drapery. If I
interrupt me, I will not be able to find the folds.

--Is it for me that you fear? I won't move until noon, I
promised you.

--This is a lady who wants to paint the portrait of her daughter, before
her marriage: they are there with the groom. Saperlotte! my drapery ...

- I will not move.

--So bring in.

A mature lady entered, followed by a plump young girl. I couldn't
see the young man, because of my head frozen to the side. They advanced
and, without greeting me, looked at me up and down. My arm and my leg
Nudes, coming out of the drapery, especially attracted their attention. The
ladies having stepped back a little, the bridegroom stepped forward: I could see him
eye, and I recognized Albert: he was the son of a general, I had him
loved and still loved her. My eye riveted on his terrified face, but
I didn't move.

                   * * * * *

One evening, I had met a very young student who had invited me to
go to the country with him the next day. Getting off the train a
another young man was waiting for us: blond, long and slender, with a
exquisite with curled golden lashes, and very fresh skin; his manners
were deferential to me, his voice clear and soft: he spoke the
literary Flemish, so we were able to talk: the one who had brought me
spoke only French, which I was just beginning to jabber. AT
as we chatted, the blond young man was astonished at all that
I read; he was explaining it to the other who was frowning more and
more.

Afterwards, he wrote to me, and it is with him that from now on I made
excursions to the countryside. It was in winter: I was usually at
fasting, my back and feet soaked, the water pouring out of my hat and
my skirts, pitifully smelling of wet dog when I arrived after
a good hour's walk, out of breath, to the station.

I still saw him from afar, his neck stretched out towards the street from where I had to
come. We went up in second and went down in the forest of Soignes.
So we went deep into the thickets.

I never asked him for money, although the other told him that I
looked for men in the street; but then he took me to a
guinguette, where he regaled me with two ham rolls and a
glass of beer. Ah! that glass of beer on an empty stomach! ... it tortured me for the
remaining of the day.

I could tell he was guessing it was my first meal; he also felt
that I loved him; but the looks he was casting at me through
her long eyelashes remained enigmatic to me.

When he got back to town, he always slipped away very quickly.

Suddenly he no longer invited me. I met the student one evening who
took me the first time.

--You gave Albert a hot piss.

And he laughed.

I didn't know what it was, but for a while I had been feeling sick ...
And now he was near me with his fiancée, and me half-naked,
exposed to their inquisition, in a stiff pose, and only seeing him
with one eye.

`` Look then, Bebert, '' said the young girl to her fiance, pointing to
the skin of my arms.

The mother whispered:

--It is badly washed skins that have these grains ...

Now I could see it with both eyes. His shadowy gaze to me
begged. They moved away to look at paintings.

I felt ridiculous, vile, pitiful, and what should he think of me?
seeing again? What hatred and disgust he must have felt for me who
had made him sick, who was there in a grotesque attitude that I did not
could leave! ... My tears flowed, without my being able to hide them,
and rolled my cheeks onto my shoulder bouncing on the
drapery.

"... He must however be grateful to me for pretending nothing ..."

The mother saw my tears.

`` Maybe she heard what you said about her skin ...

- Do you think she feels that?

They were now behind me: I heard them, but could not
see them. Ah! if, however, I wanted to destroy his happiness, and he
howl that my skin hadn't disgusted him, that in the thickets he
had wallowed on me, that I had contaminated him, and that she
would perhaps know the consequences ... But I did not flinch, my eyes
darkened with tears.

They left the workshop without looking at me.

`` Brave little girl, '' said the painter, `` they have tortured you, these
bourgeois, speaking of your skin ... If you could take baths and
pamper yourself like them, your blonde skin would be satin ...

He picked up his palette and brushed for half an hour.

- Here, my child, your hundred sous ... Wait, I will help you to put
your head upright, and stretch your skittles a little ...
wonderfully posed: do you want to pose for the portrait of this little one
bourgeois? ... They may despise you, but they will be your
shoulders, arms and hands, which her husband will admire until the end of
his life in the portrait of his fiancée: if I stuck his charcuterie
to her, he would be ashamed ...




With all my worries, I didn't have time to take care of my
discomfort. As soon as I could I would go to the hospital to ask what
I was badly affected. An intern visited me; he declared that I did not have
no disease, that I was only anemic and that this young man
didn't know his stuff.

I decided, however, not to prostitute myself, should we all die
of hunger. The worst was my parents: they had taken such a habit
of the thing they found it very simple ...

One morning, I announced that I would not go out. My father looked up.

--And why not?

--Because I don't want to be a whore my life ... If you
did you know what the men, who pick up women, demand of them ...
They would give me a lot more money if I wanted to submit to it.

--You lie, scoundrel, he yelled, you invent all this to leave us
Starve.

And, walking towards me, who was near the open window:

--What's preventing me from throwing you out the window?

I stood in front of him.

--Well, kick me out the window, it'll be better than
to continue this abject life ... Do it then, it would be over
stroke!

We were eye to eye; him, in the pose of the wrestler who goes
grab hold of his opponent; me, my thin arms and my clenched hands
lifted towards him.

All of a sudden he turned terribly pale and left ... It was over, I had
won.

All shaking, I dressed and went out to beat the workshops to
find to ask. Then, for a painter, I had mended
old tapestries ... Perhaps I could get hold of some
antique dealers, a work of this kind ...

Montagne-de-la-Cour, I entered an antique store. When i had
explained what I knew how to do, the antiquarian replied:

- Of course, I can give you work, but not right away ... if
you want to iron ...

On leaving, a young girl accosted me.

"Did you go to sell something to this old man?"

- No, I went to ask for some work.

--We have to be careful: he's an old pig ... he'll want to sleep with
you, but give you nothing ...

Hearing that I was Dutch, she told me that her mother was
too. We could understand each other, and she took me home to pick up
coffee. She introduced me to her mother, as a friend: I was very well
received. The dirt was repulsive about them. While drinking coffee and
eating bread, the woman asked me what I was doing.

--I pose with painters.

--I am a seamstress; I had, alone, to raise my two children, my husband
lost interest in it. Now Stephanie is sixteen, but she
doesn't want to learn a trade, she got used to doing nothing ...
As I was supposed to be at the workshop at eight o'clock, I was obliged to
leave the children alone; school started at half past eight,
but they weren't going. I could not come back at noon, my workshop was
being at the other end of the city: their meal was however prepared,
they had only to heat it on the stove.

His eyes were haggard, his hands hot. For the moment, she
did not have a workshop.

I felt very comfortable with them, and I understood that they were not
would not be very difficult to admit to me in their privacy.

I went out for a walk with my new friend; in the evening, she brought me back
still at home, and, as it was getting late, offered to stay
sleep. I gladly accepted, I hated going home, and
I slept with the two women: the mother on the edge of the bed, Stéphanie at the
middle and me against the alley.

Before we went to bed, the mother complained that once again Adolphe did not
did not come home.

At eight o'clock in the morning there was a rough knock on the door: two
commissionaires entered with the owner, a cutthroat woman who
held a "box" on the ground floor.

She ordered the furniture to be put outside. My friend and I, we each other
were hidden, in shirts, behind the bed.

- Look at these two kids, they have black shirts like the
stove! said the cutthroat woman contemptuously.

The commissionaires removed the furniture and carried them to the
bearing.

--It is kindness of me not to put them on the sidewalk,
she said again.

My friend's mother, her wax figure illuminated with two red spots
with cheekbones, flaming eyes, a mouth clenched with hatred,
hissed:

--Because my son, whom you took at fifteen, no longer wants
you, eh? you avenge yourself ... you dare not put the furniture on
the sidewalk, for fear of drawing attention to your move ... If I
find a home, that's good, we'll leave; otherwise we
will stay here again tonight.

When everything was out, the landlady closed the door and took the
key. My friend's mother put on her hat and shawl, and went out.

I stayed with Stephanie on the landing, near the furniture; she had
bread, a neighbor gave us coffee.

The mother returned in the evening; she could not move in until the next day in
his new home.

We carried the mattress to the attic. She thanked me for not having them
leave in such hard times. She was fidgeting on the mattress:
Stephanie and I were giggling, remembering the five warts
hairs that we had counted on the nose of an old woman. And U.S
the three of us fell asleep.

The next day a man, with a handcart, came to collect the
furniture, and I helped to arrange the small dark attic that the mother
had rented.

Then I returned home, glad to have found friends in the
foreign city.




I finished, as in a fever, the band of old tapestry, which
almost all the "fruits" had to be embroidered, and I hastened to go
deliver my work, hoping to be paid; but the antique dealer was absent
and I had to go back without money.

At home, I was expected: it had been agreed that I would bring back
food. When I got home, my mother saw in my decomposed face what was
was, and didn't even question me.

I went out soon to go see Jeannette, the cowherd, who was supposed to
with other young girls from the neighborhood, carry a small child to the
graveyard. Jeannette was delicious, in her narrow black dress and
with her white Charlotte Corday beanie, garnished with gauze puffs
black. It was I who, for the occasion, had crumpled this
cap.

--You are pale, Keetje, and you walk as if you had your feet
wet.

As I did not answer:

- Come with us to the funeral: it will affect the mother, and, on return,
you will have coffee with us.

It was in front of our dead end, in a lousy tavern-grocery store
edible, that a child had died.

There were four young girls to carry the small beer. The mother,
with very dry eyes, gave before leaving a glass of juniper to the
carriers, because it was far away and it was raining; and we started
road. A few neighbors, men with tight jackets, women in
hair and a little black shawl followed out of politeness.

I felt very far from these unsophisticated Flemings, and this
ride, through sunken lanes, where one got stuck in the mud, with
this coffin carried by girls who, to avoid puddles,
tilted left and right, seemed a barbaric thing to me
and disrespectful. Then hunger followed me: I would have liked to be already
back for the promised snack.

On the way, the shoe of one of the carriers got stuck, and we had to drop
the little coffin at the edge of the embankment, to let the young girls
rest. The one who had lost her shoe was exhausted: I offered myself
to take his place.

The girl put her cap on me. Trembling with disgust and terror, I took
one of the corners of the coffin on my shoulder, and we left in the rain
and the mud. I thought with horror of what was in this crate
badly joined, which tortured my thin shoulders; I felt like
convulsions run through me, at the thought of my dead little sister that
could have lugged around like this ... But, bah! it looks like the neighbor that
I had helped a lot, and I would certainly have a ham toast, with
coffee, like the others.

At the cemetery, it was botched in five seconds. At the exit, the men
invited the women to come and take something, but I was not
asked: my demoiselle air and my civilized language kept them away
of me.

We all returned, dripping and muddy up to our hair.

There were four cups on the table, and the four carriers
sat down; the others were not invited. I was streaming looks
towards the ham toast, the coffee scented to the point of making me tremble
of desire; but I stood there in front of the counter, as if I was waiting
Jeannette. Jeannette saw me, pale and faint.

--Keetje, come on, drink from my cup: the coffee is hot.

--Thank you, Jeannette, I know warmed up now, I'll take some
home.

And I went out.




She was lisping a little; she had big, very red cheeks, big
breasts that I envied, and the difficult gait because of real
pads of flesh that filled the soles of his feet. In the
deserted alleys of the Park, where the men attracted us, she
called thugs, when they stretched out their hands to his chest.

I was far from having his boldness with men. When we asked him
a rabbit, she still found a crust in her mother; then she,
it was to buy trinkets and cakes ... But in the days when,
I had to prostitute myself, I cried all along the road
when, after such a chore, I had to come home empty-handed and
tell the little ones that they should go to bed again without eating,
them who had cheated their hunger throughout the evening by telling themselves
stories of brigands ... Often, I would walk for hours
dark streets of a suburb, not daring to enter or hoping to find them
asleep. Many times too I walked along the canal, wondering
if I wouldn't do well to jump in.

Those things were over. If I accompanied Stéphanie, it was by
friendship, I praised myself every day for having, once and for all,
removed this shame from my life.

But I couldn't understand that well dressed people, well
lodged and eating their fill, were not honest people: I
sincerely believed that misery alone had engendered
prostitution ... However these men, for pleasure, collected
any woman, which I considered to be the height of
abjection ... When I saw them being pigs and bitches, everything
was scrambling in my brain ... Why, why, are they like this? they
have everything to be honest ... And why were they so with
me? ... They should have seen, however, that it was not for
buy me little shoes, or as a hobby, that I indulged in
them, strangers.

I thought they had to guess my position ... nobody ever did
guessed nothing ... maybe once, an officer ... he had given me
a few francs in advance. While I rolled them into a small
paper, I saw that he considered my thin arms, my speckled shirt
of flea frass. He lifted my head by the chin and looked at me a
moment, but I closed my eyes not to indulge ... he gave me
two more francs.

I felt very well that, for men, a prostitute is a being
outside nature, incapable of any human feeling, and only capable of
vile designs. It is not even necessary for them to be
prostitute: it suffices to be a poor little girl and to their
thank you...

One day, at a painter's house, a lady of her pupils had just left. The
painter told me to return a painting he had bought in a
sale; he wanted to show it to a friend of his who was there.

--My dear, I couldn't show it to you in front of this lady, but
look at that! ... that is worth nothing as art, but it is of a pig! ...

And the two of them, laughing, brought out the dirty side of the
subject.

The lady who had just left was forty years old; I had some
seventeen, these men knew nothing of my life ...

I therefore believed myself in good faith doomed to these abjections. I was
however sure that, if I had been rich and an artist, I would not have
bought this painting just because it was "pig".

So I was dumbfounded and charmed when Stephanie called men
thugs.

I also felt that if I didn't want to prostitute myself anymore, I had to
carefully conceal that I had done so; that without that, I would never
could not have escaped, that I would always have been treated with suspicion and
contempt, that I would always have counted it as a crime, that no man
would not have reached out to get me out of there in an honorable way ...
As for the women, the few with whom I had posed were of a
politeness so distant, I guessed that they believed in a subject
so different, that nothing was to be hoped for on this side.

I could have looked for a place as a servant, and personally
I was saved: yes, but the little ones ... and the parents ... despite my
aversion to them, I felt sorry for them ... eh was now earning a franc
per day; Dirk played the accordion in the taverns; Naatje was posing
from time to time the angels among painters. But that was not enough
not ... so I still had to stay with them until
that they were taller.

Always and everywhere these ideas jostled in my head, and often,
during the pose, the painter asked me why I had an expression
so gloomy or so terrified.

                   * * * * *

Stéphanie took me on Monday evenings to student balls. There we
was crazy together; these young people were lovely and treated you
equals. I especially needed this, not to be treated anymore
in inferior or suspect, and the first student who, one evening,
bought me at the bazaar a pair of cufflinks, by pure
kindness, never knew what heartbeat this gesture gave me
kind.

Another had brought us, Stéphanie and I, to his house in
countryside at the gates of the city, to eat pears. Seeing in
a greenhouse of bunches of grapes, I told him that my little brother
Klaasje had smallpox and the doctor told him he had grapes
would do good.

--I dare not give you these: they are not ripe, and my mother
would be angry if I picked them.

But, as he drove us home, he bought me a beautiful
bunch of grapes.

--There's for your little brother ...

These exquisite attentions made me proud and happy.

Of course I had lovers among them; it was a joy to me
give. Arrange it as you like, I was sure that I was
raised ... Then their beautiful language and their civilized voices
attracted me; I realized that these young people had a
education superior to that of painters and sculptors in whom I
posed.

However, the artists took care of me in a different way. One. Two
gave me a French-Flemish dictionary and a book: _History of a
child of the People_, by Erckmann-Chatrian. I read it in the evening, in
looking up each word in the dictionary; but all verbs y
were in the infinitive, which confused me.

They were talking about everything in front of me, they were discussing painting,
urged me to go to the Museum and, when I could read French well,
lent me books. Only the students were my age, and
since I exist, I have never been attracted to those of my
age. With them, in taverns and balls, we danced and we
sang, and I gave myself as I was, which I never could do
with older or younger.

However, my beauty had won. I posed a lot in the workshops,
although I was not the type of those Flemish painters, haunted by
Rubens' wives, and whom my grace almost intimidated ...
embroidered the old tapestries and silks that they bought in
the sales...




Two young people had arranged to meet us at the Bois de la Cambre. I
was hurrying down Avenue Louise, when my attention was drawn to a
handsome young thug with black curls, strolling wearily in front of
me. He had a leafless green branch in his hand, and was hitting the
dogs and small children he met on his way; he is
would turn around laughing when he had hurt them. In the Bois, he was breaking
young bushes with his stick. Then he sat down: he took little ones
pebbles, and threw them at sparrows who, chirping, sought their
graze in a pile of horse dung.

"What a dirty beast!" I said to myself ...

A red-haired girl with a snub nose passed by. Her multiple petticoats
made his walk wavy. She winked at him. He ... not
said neither yes nor no and looked at her, indifferent; then, hands in
pockets, he whistled annoyedly.

An old man walked slowly forward. They looked at each other well in
the eyes. The young man got up and went before him. I was amazed at the
way of walking: he arched his back and made the best of it. But seeing it coming
from a distance Stéphanie, I no longer paid attention to it and went towards her.

She arrived, out of breath, although she had taken the tram. Our
lovers came by car. They approached us in an embarrassed manner ...
we were so inelegant ... We strayed from the main roads in the
little frequented paths, and there all human respect abandoned them: their
their gestures and words were those of carters.

I had expected a good lunch, but they took us to a
guinguette, where they offered us a bacon omelet and a glass of
faro: they took nothing. Half an hour after this meal, I was
blinded by migraine, the manners of our gallants annoyed me. I
got aggressive and started quibbling one of them over his big hands
unbalance. Through my frequentation with painters, I was at a good school
to learn what was beautiful and ugly. Without knowing exactly what
that meant, I told him that his hands smelled of plebs, and he
cramming mine under the nose:

--There's an aristocratic hand ...

Then I taunted him about his way of walking and his too big kidneys
for a man, all accompanied by disgusted looks:

- I met a superb thug earlier, he would have worn your
elegant clothes that you ... Ah! here it is! I said, seeing it coming,
with a clear air, the young man; it looks like a foal not yet
railroad ...

I knew myself a bit in foals. My father had been a long time
stable boy at a breeder, and, when I brought him his dinner,
he showed me the foals, calling my attention to their
qualities.

Stephanie pulled me by the arm, leading us down an alley
side.

- Shut up, it's my brother, he would be able to accost us ...

But I was launched. My migraine was pulling one eye out of me and holding them tight
temples. I saw that I could insult the guy, as long as I
let it attract in the thickets. My exasperation rose, rose ...

--Listen, Stephanie, I don't want to be seen with someone who has
similar feet ... I would be lost of reputation ...

And I planted them there. Stephanie looked at me for a moment longer,
stunned, then she joined me, not knowing whether to laugh or
get angry.

- You know, you who amaze you when I call them thugs ...

--That muzzle who dared not appear with us in the main alleys,
because we are badly dressed ... If we were chic casseroles,
they would be proud to display us, but they blushed at our
rags ... Well, I wanted to show them that there are more things
vile as rags. I had a real pleasure in making this pale
bittern, with wounded vanity: he did not know where to put his giblets ...
pose for my beauty, who is sometimes a nymph, sometimes a princess, I do not
no longer want to let myself be humiliated by beings of this kind ...

Stéphanie, whom I had brought to the painters to help her find
poses, had failed: she had kept resentment.

--Oh! your painters are often also galapiats, sons of grocers
and butchers ...

--It is true, neither their voices nor their manner are like those of the
students, but you have to listen to them when they talk about what is
beautiful. The other day, as they were next door to one of them, they
were discussing the clouds of a painting: they would get angry, then
were softened, and, as there were heavy clouds, they began to
to discuss in front of the window ... Afterwards, when they were gone and
I had resumed the pose, I asked the painter what was so
rare in the clouds. Well he put down his palette, planted me
in front of the window and, during the rest of the session, he explained to me
why it was beautiful.

In my turn, I placed myself in front of her and, with my head raised, I indicated to her
thumb:

--You see, it's blurry, it's soft, it's strong, and this blue and this
gray, it matches, it blends and stands out wonderfully ...

- It's stupid, she said, it's clouds that will bring a "drache",
and you, you can't see anything other than me, and your painters are
half-gentlemen.

- I don't care! ... When they talk to me like this, I don't want to
leave their studio ... If ever a painter wants to make me his little one
woman, he will be able to count on me, I will not cheat on him ... But they will not
do not take me seriously, I am too short and too thin: I have
than five feet, and their wives are at least three feet
eighty, and thighs ... we should see ...

She took me home, where, all day long, the dislikes and
nausea made me feverish.

But in the evening, completely relieved, after washing my face and
combed my blond curls, I was sparkling with beauty and youth,
to go to a prom in a garden.




When I was not posing or had no embroidery to
mending, I strolled with my friend through the streets. Impossible to stay
at home: my mother was bothering me on purpose, in the cubicle where I stayed
withdrew to read or to wash myself, on the pretext that I
moved away from the family.

Stephanie had her false mat on her back; me, my blonde curls
held by a ribbon. Our hats were incredible objects: like
we didn't have an umbrella, they had to endure all the
severe weather; we are constantly retyping them. We stretched our skirts
in trains, whose sidewalks and muddy streets we swept. Under
the porches or behind a tree in the public gardens, we
put chalk on his face, because he was distinguished to be pale.
We tucked in our pointed blouses to uncover our throats.

I was gibbering French as much as I could, lending great
pay attention to pronunciation.

Often, men followed us through secluded streets. They we
joined, but I refused any offer. Stéphanie, she accepted.

When it was in the center of town, I was going to wait for him at the gallery
Bortier, where I read a little in the books at each display. If she
was late, I was taking a tour of the Flower Market, the perfumes of which
charmed even more than the colors.

Usually she would laugh when she joined me, and feast on cakes, or
lots of mussels, in a cellar in the Grand'Place. Then we went to
Vieux Marché to buy old shoes or a skirt for Stéphanie.

--You know, Keetje, you are stupid not to take advantage of the opportunities ... you
could also buy you shoes.

- No, it is sworn.

--You prefer to walk with shoes that take up water and
snow, and which put splinters in your toes, like
the other day.

- I don't want to sell myself anymore.

--But you do the same with your lover for nothing ...

--It's not the same thing.

--But if.

--But no.

--Explain.

I did not know how to explain, but, for me, it was not the same
thing.

Then I reflected. Did I have the right to let the little ones if
often without eating, and the rent not paid; and give me for nothing to
the one I liked? ... So in the evening, I sent Stéphanie to
go tell my lover that I didn't want to "date" anymore, and,
for months I had bouts of fierce virtue.

                   * * * * *

The difficulty was with the painters: almost all of them demand that we
delivers to them and, if one refuses, they become disagreeable and often
do not continue the table.

Naatje, who was fourteen, had not returned to a
sculptor, because of his obsessions. He complained to one of his friends,
which made a medallion in my opinion, that my sister had planted it there.

`` You will probably do the same with my friend, '' he said,
speaking to me. But she will pay me, your sister, I will tell
all the artists, and she won't have a pose anymore.

`` But, sir, she wouldn't have embarrassed you if you
had left her alone. She came to your house to work
and not for your entertainment.

`` My dear, '' said the other, `` if the little one does not want to, you must not
insist; if she agrees, that's something else ...

--Ah! that's why ... I can't work if I don't sleep
with the model ... Besides, why not? what can that be
make him!




Hein was sixteen and was learning the trade of a coachbuilder.

Since the spring, he was more agile, straighter, and his eyes
had grown larger. In the evening, on his way home from work, he had supper in haste,
made a bit of toilet, and went out. On Sunday, he washed more
carefully, greased his hair and arranged his
thin tie, which he could not tie as he wanted; he
came home too late for dinner. As I was very bothered by the
household worries, which I had to support, I was not tall
watch out for the change of Hein; but when, in summer, he was given the
Sunday morning sandwiches to take them to the countryside, and that
instead of fifty centimes, as pocket money, he demanded
seventy-five, I asked my mother what was going on. She me
answered, rather concerned, that Hein loved a young girl of fifteen
years who, for a while, coughed a little and had to spend Sundays
in the countryside.

- During the week, she cannot, the work holds her back. The mother is
widow, they make little baby booties to live on: adorable
little shoes in white reps, white skin, satin ... well
delicious, they make them by the dozen, and have no time to
look up all week, like me when I was
lace maker ... They live in a small room on a courtyard, because this
nice job brings almost nothing.

--But how do you know all this so well? is it Huh who entrusted it to you?

- No, he hardly says anything, he is afraid that we are laughing. This is
the mother of the little one who came to find me. It's been months since
girl coughs, doctor claims she must have air, but
do you want them to do? you have to live ... So, they leave on
Sunday morning with their food, and they go to the
fields; but the little one no longer wanted to go there without Hein. The mother is
came, asked me if I would allow my son to accompany them; it
said that they were honorable women and that the health of her
child depended on it. As they are also very poor, he takes his
toast with him. She invited me for coffee: we have
thus became better acquainted.

--And you didn't tell me?

--Oh! we don't have time to talk to you: as soon as you come home, you take
your books and you isolate yourself ...

                   * * * * *

The Sundays Hein spent in the country made him radiant. He
came home around eight o'clock, all pink, perfuming the room of a maid
smell of greenery. He no longer went out. Often he thought about everything else
of the evening: he smiled and moved his lips. Obviously he
dialogued while asking the questions, and he certainly heard the
answers.

Other times he would take a smeared notebook and draw
cars, carts, stretchers, gates.

One evening when we were alone, I approached him to see his
drawing.

- You made progress, huh, but also you work a lot.

--If I want to know my job well, I must understand it well, and a
good car is very difficult to do. So I need to know the
mechanics of it all. I don't wanna be a crust, and if I get
marie, I must be able to earn a living for my family.

--I think you are going crazy: you are sixteen years old.

"Yes, it's for later," he laughed; but it is now that I have to
learn for later. Do you think I would like to raise my children
in famine, as we have been?

--It is not because father did not know how to work well that we
were hungry, but because there are too many of us: nine children,
it's ridiculous!

--But what do you do when you have a wife you love?

He blushed and lowered his head: I felt a wave of desire
Browse.

He looked up at me.

--How to do so as not to have so many children, because I have children
would like...

He looked at me so candidly, it seemed to me so pure, that I was silent,
ashamed that I was, in front of him, for my knowledge.

                   * * * * *

One evening he exclaimed:

--That's it...

--What is that?

--Here.

And he showed me his drawing.

- It takes four men to turn the iron circle of a wheel; with
this machine, which I have been looking for a while, it only takes one. I
will show it to the boss.

                   * * * * *

One Sunday when I had put on a navy blue tie, he said to me:

--But it's a man's tie, it would suit me better than you. Looked,
mine is a real string.

--Yes, but what shall I wear then?

--You still have a spit.

--That is true. Come on, I'll put a tie on you.

When I had made the knot, he stood in front of the small mirror, and looked
with satisfaction the knot at two ends, under its turned-down collar.

- Don't you find my neck too long?

- But no, a long neck is very beautiful.

--Ah! it's beautiful ... I didn't know.

                   * * * * *

All this summer, Hein lived his happiness on earth.

I got closer and closer to him: our Sunday evenings were
delicious; I read, and he drew. He had long hands
thin, at the end of very thin wrists, but these delicate hands were
so skillful and so solid that they seemed to me an admirable tool ...

                   * * * * *

Towards autumn he became sad.

`` Come on, '' I said to him one evening, `` talk to me.

`` She coughs a lot more, '' he cried, `` and the weather is getting too long.
bad for the countryside.

In winter she had to be taken to hospital. Huh went there every
Sundays and came back sick for the whole day. She died at
spring. After the funeral, he locked himself in the small room where
was my old sofa: you could hear her moan like a little girl.




I felt at the end of my rope and worried that I would have to go back to the hospital:
conditions in which I worked exhausted me. I got up to
seven o'clock and got dressed: but my mother had not yet prepared the
coffee, the stove was smoking, the water would not boil, or Kees was
not yet returned with the bread ... in short, half the time, I was spinning
fasting.

I always had to go very far: we lived on the edge of a
popular suburb, and painters, almost all, at the other end
from the city. In winter, the season when I posed the most, I had to
rain, snow and frost, walk a good hour, without overcoat,
often the walk made difficult by a nail that got into my
soles of the feet, always wet stockings, having no spare.
So I arrived, sweating from the race and dripping, my eyes
shiny and the complexion raised ... So you had to undress, and
strike a pose standing or on one knee, or the whole body weight on one
elbow. After a few moments, I was shivering: chills me
were going through, and I was becoming of a cadaverous pallor: a cough that does not
never left me from the winter shook me every moment and disturbed the
drapery laying.

The painters had a lot of patience, - there was never only one
lady who fired me because I was coughing; - I saw that I
inspired great pity; but they were often poor devils,
having too little money to waste it, and sometimes they
postponed the pose to another day.

At noon, I usually ate toast, with a glass of beer
or coffee; in only a few, there were sardines or
cheese. Around four o'clock, I returned.

The potatoes had been boiled at noon; my mother used to wear one
ten on a plate, with a flour sauce poured over it; it
placed them in the oven without covering them. In the course of
in the afternoon, Dirk would grab a potato; after school, Kees
snatched another potato, then Naatje another; even my mother
took it from time to time, telling myself that I ate well at noon at
painters, and when I got home there were only three or
four potatoes, dried under a layer of flour; it was
my dinner.

I was making a scene, or begging my mother to cook some potatoes
cool earth for when I got home.

- Make a kitchen for you, never in life!

--So at least prevent the little ones from taking them, and put a
lid on: steam would keep them cool.

--With all your embarrassments, if you don't want to eat them, give them to
others: they will not be asked.

This is what I often did, and I sent to seek by Naatje, for
fifteen cents, a small slice of lean bacon that I ate raw,
preferably on black bread sprinkled with pepper and salt; with that,
a cup of coffee, or rather chicory water, warmed up.

When my stockings were too dirty I had to wash them in the evening and
put the night to have them dry in the morning. My mother wanted me
do the laundry, scrub the floor. I could explain that,
posing a lot for the hands, I must have looked after them: she does not
could understand.

--It is to do nothing that you are inventing this: in my opinion, if a hand
is red and I want to paint it white, I just have to take
white color ...

I was choking with rage at this insanity.




I was hired by a German, who painted small pictures of
kind to live, and in the meantime was working on a large canvas, like
serious work. I posed for small paintings. A young girl, in
pink or sky blue dress, blonde curls on the back, sat on
a dune and looked at the sea, or dreamed in a shepherdess, or wrote a
name on the sand with the tip of its parasol; it was me, the young one
girl.

One morning I arrived so drenched that when I took off my blouse,
the painter uttered an exclamation: my skin was all purple,
wet bodice that had rubbed off on me.

--But you can't pose in this state, "Kind weapons!"

He washed me, made me put on a shirt and underpants of his own; Above,
I put on the pink dress and sat down on a stool covered with a
large yellow canvas, which stretched out on the ground to reflect the
sea ​​sand on my dress and on my neck.

For the next two days, I was not to go to his place; he was working
to its large canvas, with a model dressed in Oriental. When i returned
on Fridays he was nervous, and unfriendly as usual. All
suddenly he put down his palette, came towards me, got me up a little roughly
head, and looked at me for a long time.

--No, it's not you ...

--What's the matter?

--Three gold coins were taken from me, which were there in this secretary
open; I put them there on Monday and only yesterday I noticed
that they had disappeared ... There is only you and her, he said,
showing the Orientale of the painting, which are entered here; but it is not
certainly not you.

--It does not say either that it is she: we clean the workshop, we
light the fire, what do I know? ... But why leave coins lying around
gold on furniture?

--Why? ... Could that tempt you?

But, immediately, he came towards me.

- No, you wouldn't be tempted ...
let it soak, like you the other day, i'd be a long time ago
in prison.

--Brrr ... I would rather die of hunger and cold, than to commit
an act that could lead me to jail, because then I would believe myself
irremediably soiled.

                   * * * * *

Another time, I went, in a blast of snow, to a
Englishman who liked my head very much; he painted it and repainted it. In
arriving, I take off my boots: he puts them down, to dry them, on
the stove, where there was almost no fire. I strike a pose ...
rest, I saw one of my boots that yawned like a jaw
open, and the other had a charred sole. I started to cry everything
high. The painter was so moved that he gave me twenty francs to buy
shoes. I bought myself, of course, a pair of ten francs, and
the other ten francs were spent at the house.

I wasn't selling anymore. However, on famine days, and when I do
found work nowhere, I was going to visit this painter
English. He was twenty-four. Without showing it, I had a crush
for him. I was very to his liking. When I rang, it looked like he
was waiting for me, so quickly did he descend the stairs to open me; he
took me like a hungry person. When it was time to leave he gave me seven to
eight francs ... enough to eat for three days with us.




A lady, who was doing hand studies with me, asked me if
I didn't want to go get him some tea in a department store
Japanese. Looking at the trinkets, I couldn't help but buy a
little toy of fifty centimes, very pretty and very ingenious. I
give it to the lady's little boy. The whole family cried out
so much of what I had been able to choose an object as tasteful as,
throughout the morning, I was ashamed and sad ...

                   * * * * *

Elsewhere ... During the pose, the husband in the dressing gown had come
sit in his wife's studio. Their daughter was taking a lesson in
singing in an adjoining room. All of a sudden she gave a very
false. I jumped as I did:

--Oh!...

The gentleman looked at me, astonished.

--How? 'Or' What? you hear that too ...

Also! ... Decidedly these people take us for savages ...
Too!...

It all made me sour.

                   * * * * *

A great lady, who painted in her spare time,
had taken me in sympathy. At Naatje's first communion, she
had bought dresses for the little one and for me.

I told him one day that I would have liked so much to know a trade.

--Have you ever been married, Keetje?

I understood her perfectly. However, I did not believe I was lying when I answered
"no".

--So I will give you French lessons, and then I will
will place as store maid.

--Oh! Mrs! Oh! Mrs! I cried.

She instructed her concierge to find me a French teacher. The
concierge found among his acquaintances an old young lady who,
for twenty francs a month, would give me two lessons a week. It
dictated to me and I had to learn verbs by heart, but
she gave me no explanation.

At the end of the second month, having received the twenty francs to pay the
lessons, I returned home, the gold coin rolled up in a small piece of paper.
It was summer: few painters in town and the rent to pay ...
parents did so well that I gave them the twenty francs.

The next day, the old lady, surprised that I didn't pay her
not, went to the concierge. At the next lesson, she said to me:

- You got the money, didn't you?

I answered "yes", turning crimson. She didn't insist.

In the evening, I wrote to the lady, who was at her castle, that I had paid
our rent with the professor's money, then that I didn't have him
told the truth by telling her that I had never been married.

I immediately received the answer: "I should have confessed to the young lady
that I had paid our rent with his money, there was no shame
to that; and I could also write better in French, now that
I had received lessons; but I had to understand that she, the lady, does
could no longer take care of it ... "

I was without any basis, even in my language: my mother had us
sent too little to school. I had no idea what a
verb, an adjective, a noun. The professor unearthed by this
concierge did not speak to me about it, and these semblance of lessons had not lasted
only two months ... The daughters of my protectress, aged seventeen and
eighteen years old, did not know how to write correctly the language they
had sucked with milk and had been taught since the age of
ten years.

As for the "marriage", which made me unworthy of receiving lessons ... Ma
protector, still young, was the mistress of her best husband's
friend, and her husband, her lover. They were still living the
each other, and almost ruined themselves at sumptuous parties
that they offered themselves in their castles or their hotels.

But, at that time, I did not judge her: I only took into account that
of what she had wanted to do for me, and, as she liked
blueberries, for many years I went, in season, him to
picking loads, in the fields behind Laeken.

--From who? asked the new concierge, when I
was bringing.

- No matter ... put them first in water for an hour, to offer them,
very fresh, to Madame ...




One winter evening, when I got home around five o'clock, I found a
letter from a lady painter, who asked me to come to her house before
six o'clock. I had to go to the other end of town: I came out
immediately and arrived sweating, all pink and lively, just in time
again.

As I crossed the corridor, I passed a gentleman who was smiling at me; But
I was too busy to pay attention. I arranged with the
lady; I him much more. She was going to start a large canvas with
me ... nice! work to do for a long time ...

When I left, two young people followed suit. Of pink that
I was from having run, I had become quite white. I was shivering: I
hadn't taken anything since noon.

One of the two looked at me very ostensibly: he was a big young man
man, very well dressed, with very blond hair and hazel eyes.
The one who smiled at me in the hallway was a very dark-haired Jew; he
suddenly came to me and invited me to go have something with
him; I accepted. The blond stayed at a distance; in front of the cafe, I myself
turned around and said:

--And your friend?

- Come on!

The three of us entered the cafe. Soon the young brown man
left us, and the blond invited me to dinner.

It was my first time in a restaurant. I did not know
how to behave, how to handle a spoon ...
I held her like children, then the knife embarrassed me, and hold
fork in my left hand ... Finally, I decided to eat with the
knife, I had heard it was chic. The young man me
watched doing; he was visibly embarrassed. I then took the party
to observe how he was doing: I imitated him, it went very well.

After dinner we went to see _Les Cloches de Corneville_. My new
friend was German, speaking French about as bad as I did. I
felt he had very little experience, almost proud to be with a
women. Also, when, while escorting me, he made me, on our way,
enter a hotel, I went there without making many sentences ...
felt that this foreigner wanted to do like his comrades: to have a
mistress; that his friend had told him "I have your business", and that not
to grant him what he asked for was to break that thing so well
sketched; that the next day he would have turned to another and
wouldn't have thought of me anymore ... then her golden eyes and blond hair
were very beautiful ... He had a lovely name: Eitel.

Driving me home at two in the morning, he asked me to have dinner with
him the next day.

I was, I was sure, on the threshold of another life.




Two exquisite memories have remained with me from that time.

One, from Albert, the general's son. He knew what I was doing in the evening
in the streets. Well, never, in his ways with me, did he have me
makes you feel disdain. Always, when he approached me, he took off his hat,
and, when he thought I had made him sick, he left me there with nothing
say.

One evening I met him at a prom. He thought
that it was a pity that I had failed there, that I was no longer so
although before, from all points of view.

I had acquired the high verb; I was laughing and joking. Did he mean
that the profession did not matter, that the personality made
everything? ... As I looked at him in tears:

--Ah! that look is still yours! ...

My head, my poor head began to beat the countryside. I did not understand
not. How could I be better when I picked up men for
live?...

I was dumbfounded, and I felt I shouldn't
continue this so-called life of recovery.

                                   *

                                 * *

The other memory is that of a sixteen-year-old schoolboy.

Stephanie was the mistress of a student leaving college; he
had a friend, half Spanish, Rodrigue, who was to stay there six more
months, then enter the Military School. He brought her, and we went out
together by the isolated streets of the suburbs.

When the street was sloping, we ran down it to see who
would be the first at the bottom. I had the agility of a goat and often
I was the first; but when Rodrigue passed me, he turned the
head towards me, and, with his Spanish teeth mixed with Moorish, and his
huge black eyes, hat in hand, ebony hair blowing in the wind, he
laughed at me triumphantly.

In the distant taverns, we would have a drink of "brunette",
but before that we would jump over puddles with both feet.

Stephanie was in the mood, because no exercise was for her
possible. She was still in the mood when her lover was chatting with
me, instead of taking care of her. Rodrigue then shook my arm, and
flaming eyes.

- Leave them! he said.

And he wanted us to walk behind or in front, to isolate ourselves.
He gave me his arm, and, his head tilted towards my face, his breath
brushing against me, he spoke to me. He was extremely proud to be able to talk
with me.

--You are not at all like the others. What are you doing with this crane? ...
I have a cousin who you look like, I also tell her everything ...

He was an orphan, his mother was Spanish, his guardian wanted him to
entered the Military School.

- I will be, very young, general, you will see ... and our country will end well
by fighting one day; otherwise I'm leaving, I don't want to be one
parade soldier.

There was never any question of love between us. I looked at him like
Hein or Dirk; as for him ... I think his senses were not
awake, we didn't share a kiss.

One evening he told me that in the morning, while they were at the table, he
had seen me pass with Stéphanie; that the students had all laughed,
seeing little women; that he had blushed and hid
figure in his briefcase.

I had already met the young German, and wanted, since
the reflection that Albert had made to me at the ball, to leave this life of
boy. Rodrigue asked me to go out alone with him, the day before his
entry to the Military School. Not knowing how to turn him away, I gave it to him
promised: I was to find him at six o'clock in the square, in front of the station
from the North, which a few gas lampposts left in the half-light.
But now the German writes to me to give me too
Appointment...

So I hid myself under a door. The little one arrived first; he ... not
could see me. Not finding me, he fidgeted, walked long
in large; he was going to look around the corner. The German being always
late, I could see all his annoyance from afar. At the end he left: he
had pulled out his handkerchief and was wiping his eyes.




Since I knew Eitel, I avoided places where I could have
meet students. Stephanie sulked at me, because I didn't want to
not let her know my lover.

I saw him three times a week. Coming home from work, I
tame myself as best I could; at six o'clock, I was at
Appointment. He had bought me gloves, a veil and an umbrella.
We had dinner for six to seven francs in one of the old restaurants downstairs
from the city. Afterwards we would go to an operetta or spend the evening at the
café-concert.

The concert-café singers stunned me. I was wondering why
they had the voice so different from the voice of the singers
operetta, and how they managed to push it like that; I did not have
no idea of ​​the song learned, but it seemed quite
defective.

I loved Judic. Mme Théo, in _La Petite Mariée_, seemed to be singing
false. I think I heard Granier in _La Marjolaine_: she was
slim and slender, and pleased me infinitely. But one evening, at the Galleries
Saint-Hubert, I had a revelation: Céline Chaumont was playing _La Cigale_.
My laughter rockets went off so spontaneously that everyone around
me was having fun. Céline Chaumont has never been to Brussels since.
without my going to hear it.

_La Petite Marquise_ and even _Toto chez Tata_ introduced me to the theater
speak.

With my friend, I warmly discussed the actions of the actors
and although for a long time in my life I preferred men to women,
women's work interested me more.

I thought the acting life was a lifelong wedding life, but
I came back quickly, just for wanting to imitate Céline Chaumont when
she was juggling balls of wool ... I saw that it was not a
game of pleasure, but application and patience. For the moment, I
didn't go into it any further.

After a while, Eitel took me, after dinner, to the cafe,
instead of the theater or the café-concert. I was mortally bored there; I
I would have been content to talk, but he was not a talker ... so
I told him it knocked me out. After some tugging, he
confessed to me that it was very expensive to dine at a restaurant and go to the
theater three times a week ... then the hotel ...
convinced.

--If you need your money for more useful things, we do not
must not spoil it with distractions. I thought you had
a lot of money...

- Not anymore ... we were very rich, but my father lost
much of his fortune.

--Oh! I am very well here, I like to chat as much.

--What do you want to talk about? It's a shame that you don't know how to play
cards or bac ...

--Ah! no, that annoys me, but let's go to bed.

--Ah! my little beast, you are charming ...

                                   *

                                 * *

Carnival was approaching. I had a mad desire to dress up and go
at the Bal.

One evening, Eitel said to me:

--I will offer you two things, you can choose one ... We
can do the Carnival, rent you a costume, go to dinner, then to the ball
and supper, or buy yourself a beautiful dress ... one of the two, it's up to you
to choose.

I was all shuddering with joy, hearing him list these
wonders ... Finally I could know what it is to be beautiful and
to go to a ball, if only for once. But a pretty dress that
would last me two years ...

He looked at me curiously, with his beautiful hazel eyes. I hesitated
not.

--I like a dress better, it will stay with me, and I will be more suitable
to go out with you ...

`` Well, here's a hundred and twenty-five francs, make yourself elegant ... In eight
days, it's Mardi Gras, we'll go have a bite to eat and see the
masks.

Great God, what a sum!

The next day, I went to rue Neuve to buy myself a ready-made dress,
that they changed to my size. It was dark green, very narrow, long
tunic, the bodice with basques with a small cape, and garnished with
taffeta buttonholes. It cost eighty francs; he me
forty-five remained.

I wanted to get out once and for all: so I hadn't said anything at
us of that money. Besides, I had been earning a lot for some time;
an amateur had started a large canvas with me, he was scratching it
after each session and started again the next day. I was in joy:
"If he continues like this, I said to myself, there is no reason why
stop ... "

I bought with the remaining forty-five francs:

                             Franks
  1 pair of ankle boots 12.00
  1 green felt hat 3.00
  1 tuft of rooster feathers 2.75
  1 green velvet ribbon 1.50
  1 green gauze veil 2.75
  2 shirts at 3 fr. 6.00
  2 pants at 2 fr. 50 5.00
  1 purple petticoat 5.00
  1 pair of stockings 2.50
  3 handkerchiefs 1.50
  1 soap 0.10
                              -----
                              42.10
  I add for a bath 1.00
                      Total 43.10




I told myself that I couldn't dress in these beautiful clothes without
to be washed from head to toe: with us, it was impossible, with all
the children around me. Besides, my mother thought that a girl
should wash only the face and hands, and since I
wanted to be suitable! ...

I decided to wash my hair with panama wood and go take
a bath in town ... Ah! this first bath ... this feeling of being
fully in hot water ... I will never forget it. I had first
a little suffocation, then, it was exquisite ...

I had brought my beautiful underwear, so that I no longer had to wear
with us only my dress and my hat. Coming out of there I felt
alert and cheerful. I had a scene with my mother, because I had bought
these clothes instead of giving the money in the household, like I
always did. In vain I said that it would have been deceiving my friend, that
similar acts could make me lose it ... she did not want to
out of whack.

I put on my beautiful dress, my hat a little back so as to show
my waves. My curls spread over my back, held by a
velvet: the panama wood gave them a golden glint. I surrounded
my hat and my face with the gauze veil, which I crossed behind the
head, and, bringing the ends under the chin, I made a big knot.

At home, there was no mirror, but when, in town, I could
seeing in the mirrors, I had difficulty recognizing myself. I was
long, thin, very elegant, and contentment made a figure
of rare beauty ...

Eitel was waiting for me, accompanied by a friend with whom we often went out and
who loved me very much. They didn't recognize me. I had fun passing
twice near them; I heard Eitel say:

`` But she's never late ...

I lifted my veil and accosted them.

--Ah! it's you! ... Really it's incredible! No! But! is she
charming! looks like she's never worn any other clothes ...

In a nice spontaneous and proud movement, he offered me his arm; setting
put to my right. I was trembling with happiness and pride. Jabbering
all three French, we took the rue Neuve, which was then a
long poorly lit gut.

I had no overcoat, but I was not cold: my little cape
and my mainsail made me look bundled up. It was freezing; wind
was strong enough and made my rooster feathers fly, and, when
I saw my shadow against the houses or on the ground, with these feathers
hovering over my head, I didn't feel at ease. When entering
the covered aisle of the restaurant, Eitel saw me in full light; He will be
my arm against him.

"My little beast," he said, tenderly.

Go for little beast! ... I knew what that meant: that
was equivalent to "my hummingbird" or "my butterfly."

After dinner, we were in a large cafe, to join his
compatriots. I knew a few, they all made me charming
welcome and complimented me. All of a sudden I thought I froze, but
pretended nothing.

Among them was a young man who, one evening, had picked me up on the
sidewalk: he had long bargained for two out of ten francs that I
was wondering. He began to whisper with his neighbor. Eitel asked them
if they were talking about business to be so serious.

`` No, '' said one, `` we were talking about a sidewalk runner, who is
pass for a decent girl ...

Eitel was already no longer listening, very busy with the masks that wandered about. I
from time to time put my handkerchief over my mouth, to hide my
chattering of teeth: I felt pale. So that he would not notice
nothing, I asked for a very hot toddy. Around midnight, all these gentlemen,
who were in full dress, went to the La Monnaie ball, and we
left.

I had suffered so much in this cafe that I was very depressed, and I
told myself that, for me, all joy would always be spoiled, that I was
crazy and that I could never wash it off. And all of a sudden, under
her kisses, I caught myself sobbing ... I might as well admit everything to him ... Ah!
no! ah! no!

- Let's see, what's the matter?

So with my head on her chest I tell her I was so miserable
home, that I was in charge of all the household, that my father did not
never worked and I couldn't take it anymore.

--How? 'Or' What? it is you who supports all your family? ... but it is
fool, you can't continue this, you have to think about yourself, you don't have the
right to sacrifice yourself thus.

Ah! here is a new language ... I thought we should never think
to oneself, and that I hurt for no longer wanting to toil exclusively
for us ... So it was not bad to think of yourself: that
calmed me down.

- Do you know what, my little beast, come and live with me. Only the
day when I have to leave or get married, you won't tell me that I have you
deceived and you will not bore me.

I sat up, stunned ... “What! he doesn't know anything about me,
he does not even suspect it, and he talks to me like this ... what if he
knew! ... this handsome boy is lined with a bittern! "

--If you want, come for as long as it lasts: you will be out of the
paws of your parents who exploit you, but it is agreed that you do not
will do no embarrassment when it comes to an end. It's out of honesty
that I tell you: if you were not the exquisite creature that you are, I would not
wouldn't talk to you so honestly.

I spent the rest of the night brooding and wondering why
all these ugly and degrading things were beating down on me ... then I
revolted me.

"Damn! I will go to his place, because, with us, life has become
impossible. I'll give them the money I earn, but I owe them
leave or I commit suicide ... "

And, looking at the beautiful blond head of my lover, who slept with fists
closed:

--As for you, I reward you enough with my skin, I owe you nothing
else...

The next day, at our place, I packed a bundle of my clothes, I told my
mother that she could count on everything I would earn from
painters. She didn't want to let me out. I had my finest
clothes hanging on my arm. She called eh to the rescue for me
block the way: he had tears in his eyes.

Suddenly, I noticed my old sofa which served as my bed; he is
was in front of a door that opened outside. I jump on the
sofa, opened the door, and walked down the stairs.

Before they got over their excitement, I was in the street and
hopped on the passing tram.

Half an hour later, I put my clothes back in the mirror cabinet,
next to those of my friend.




What a difference in life! ... I had a lot of poses. After, I entered
in our well-kept apartment where I was alone ... no noise around
from me ... and where I could read without being distracted. So I don't
was giving, reading ...

At six o'clock my little dinner was brought up to me on a tray covered with
towel: it cost me a franc fifty. The days that I did not ask
not, I had lunch at noon with two small cups of coffee that I
prepared in a Viennese machine, two rolls and
twenty-five cents of ham or cheese. Around three o'clock, in my
nicer dress, I was going for a walk in Montagne-de-la-Cour.

The Montagne-de-la-Cour at that time was the place where, in winter, women
from all worlds and from all conditions came to the same
hours, between three and five, to do their shopping or to
walk around and stare at each other. Men were rarer.

The woman was at home there. All shops for dresses, hats,
fine lingerie, furs, jewelry, shoe stores
luxury apartments were clustered in this old sloping street. We have it
went down and, by the rue de la Madeleine, one pushed to the
"Passage"; then we went back up. Taking tea was unknown: we were going
at most, eat a quick cake at Brias, at Cantersteen,
and again ... Me especially, I could not, not having enough money.
Twenty-five years ago, in Brussels, when we hadn't taken a walk
Montagne-de-la-Cour, we had not gone out.

I was jubilant when, young, pretty and well dressed, I walked around in this
elegant and intimate environment, because, intimate, she was, the
Montagne-de-la-Cour, we recognized each other without knowing each other.

- See this little girl with her wavy hair: she must be a stranger,
the ladies said, staring at me. We keep our voices low in Belgium.

“Ah! here is this lady with her beautiful furs, ”I thought. And we
went up and down tirelessly, until five o'clock at most
late.

I only have to close my eyes to see walking again, frivolous and
thick, in their coarse dresses and with their little condoms
tied on the side under the chin, the ladies fresh and plump, the eyes
hollow, but the mouth swollen towards great pleasures. Their
crude and tasty silhouettes come and go. They enter
in stores that I could list, on both sides of the street,
from Place Royale to Cantersteen ... Now everything is
demolished ...

I have also seen men and women grow up and grow old that I do not have
never known except to have met them in the city. The little
girl, with braids on her back, I saw her become a young girl,
then stroll with her mother and fiance on the other side, then young
married ... pregnant ... then with babies. Later size
elegant thickened and her hair was turning gray; she renounced the
flirtatiousness and transformed into the good franquette.

And the men who, almost kids, naively admired me, telling me
kindnesses in passing, I saw their first beard grow, then
their belly ... There are men who, for fifteen years, had a
expression of contentment when they met me, and who all
gently passed by my side without seeing me anymore.

I have lived like this in the life of many inhabitants of Brussels, without
while our natures have merged: I have remained a stranger to
their tastes and their way of feeling, and they never liked me.

No one loved Brussels in a more special way than I did. I liked
the city, its movement and its streets, down to its small flat cobblestones;
but, as soon as I got to know people from any
world, there was surprise ... we felt so different that
contact was never made. The rare knowledge that I had
did not treat me like their Belgian friends, and I never knew
give me, despite all the desire that I had, because it was the great
desire of my life, to have a friend ...

                                   *

                                 * *

In the evening, we stayed at home; we had no need to go out
and, when I know we have hot beer with eggs, a recipe
national of Eitel, he had the feeling of being in his country,
he said, and a nostalgia passed in his beautiful brown eyes ... But
quickly, to dispel this thought, I scratched it with both hands
gently in his linen blond hair and, like a big cat, he
sighed and half closed his eyelids, of well-being. Him me
did few catteries ...

He now spent most Sundays with friends. Then I
I would put my hats on or put my dresses back on, but most of all I was reading.

I asked the landlady if she didn't have any books for me
to lend. She took me down from the attic of bound fashion journals,
1855 to 1865, and almost all of Molière ... Molière! I read it all at once,
and it was not a dead letter for me. I understood it like a brain
twenty-year-old can understand it; I felt, in the strange form for
me, life and the truth.

The old fashion newspapers have also done me a great service.
When, later, I read the de Goncourt, I saw their heroines
move in their finery; I saw Renée Mauperin in her reps dress
white, which ballooned around her ... The costume, moreover,
still keenly interested. Since then, I have understood that it is because he
is part of our mentality, that it dictates our actions and our
attitudes: the Zeeland peasant women, because of their headdresses, turn
the head like the women in Gothic paintings, and their mass of petticoats
force them to turn around completely to look behind them.

In order to have books at my disposal, I subscribed to a firm of
reading: there again I made astonishing discoveries. I had asked
serious books; I owe a lot to the employee who understood me so well.
Thanks to him, I was able to initiate myself into what France had best in
writers throughout the nineteenth century, and as, in reading,
I actually see and feel people and things, in their atmosphere,
with the colors and the perfumes, I lived, in the company of the duchesses
de Balzac, sumptuous Sunday afternoons ... I went as far as
breathe the confined air of their apartments.

Those that I did not understand or taste then, I tasted them more
late. To all of them I owe a part of the slow but sure evolution which
has been fulfilled in me. I had no other guide than this employee.

- "There you go, Madame, _Les Filles de Feu_", or: "I kept you
_Mauprat_ ", or:" Here is _la Cousine Bette_, you are not going to
to sleep..."

Sunday mornings, I often went to the Old Market. The displays of
books kept me especially and was it not that one day I found
_Les Confessions_ by Jean-Jacques ... I read a page in front of the stall.

--How much is this book?

--A franc fifty, because it's you.

I take the book and while walking start to read it; arrival at the Park,
I sit down on a bench. I came home an hour too late for dinner.

Never has a book stirred me so much ... he had been in misery
like me, he had been a mercenary like me, he had lived on charity
like me ... and, at Madame de Warens, had he not had to accept everything
his hands?...

So there had been miserable people who had dared to speak and not
hide their sufferings and their involuntary debasement ... Then
was it a degradation when one had been forced? Is
degradation does not come from voluntary and chosen acts?

I walked back and forth in my apartment, the book pressed on
my chest, wandering and asking him if I had done wrong in
giving my body as food to feed the little ones back home ...

When Eitel returned around midnight, he found me with a fever in my face.

--You are wrong to read so much, and this Jean-Jacques was a cynic
to display his shame in this way ...

`` You fool, '' I murmured, `` and so you who told me bluntly that
you only took me as a toy ...




Crowds have always inspired me with panic terror. A big
burial or a military deployment made me make a detour
to avoid them.

For the processions alone, I dared to stop, but they do not
attracted me only by the beauty side. Embroidered banners, surplices
pleats and purple copes with silver flowers, the little girls in
white, the flowers that were stripped, and even the Virgin of wood with
her mantle, her golds and her lace, perched on trestles and carried
on the shoulders of men, filled me with admiration. But the
faithful, with their candles, and the following crowd made me
the impression of a bunch of degenerates; they inspired me a great deal
disgust: I never wanted to join them.

One Sunday, on the route of a procession of Saint Gudula, Eitel
wanted to make me kneel; had taken off his hat, although he was
Protestant.

"But I don't understand you," I said to him afterwards.

--Ah! the crowd dragged me ...

                                   *

                                 * *

One evening, a huge procession of workers came out of Place Royale, with
music and red flags. The torches lit up their faces
of copper casting. We had stopped, Eitel and I, for the
see pass. Soon the bass drum was struck twice, and the
music played the _Marseillaise_: the whole crowd sang this song. I
had already heard bits and pieces, I did not know the words; But
my throat tightened, I began to hum and stomp my feet in time,
and suddenly I followed suit. My friend pulls me by the arm, I stand
gives off a shake; I take the arm of a worker and, singing the
_Marseillaise_ without words, but as if raised from the ground, I am
crowd.

Eitel walked beside me, without giving me his arm, pale, his hat
in the eyes and the collar turned up.

Via the narrow rue de la Colline, we entered the Grand'Place. I
I thought I was entering an enchanted place: all the gold of the houses
sparkled ... But suddenly, through one of the alleys, mounted policemen
came out and threw themselves savagely into our midst. We
we still sang that song of the roaring volcano. The musicians are
disbanded; men were trampled under the horses, cries of
pain arose. As if dispersed by the hurricane, the crowd
whirled about the square.

Eitel lifted me up with one arm by half of the body and applied the other to me
hand over mouth, because I continued to sing bravado. He
four by four climbed the steps of one of the big houses in the square
and dropped me off at the end of a faro tavern room.

An hour later the place was empty. We went home quarreling.

- I followed you to save you, I felt that you would have let yourself be killed
in the midst of this mob. You who are afraid of crowds, when it's there
populace which rises, you change ... you are with them.

- It was not the populace, it was workers: the one to whom I
gave the arm smelled of leather.

--Oh yes! they smell good! ... you are indecipherable, I saw it this evening.

--And you who, the other day, took off your hat for this antics
religious ... it is much worse.

And, ceasing to familiarize himself with him:

- Besides, what I do or what I feel does not concern you.

We were sulking for good and didn't say a word as we undressed.
In bed I put the sheet between us and lay down against the alley so as not to
not touch it.

I couldn't sleep, I turned and turned. I still felt
the smell of leather from my crowd mate; I heard the gallop of
horses and the cries of the trampled people, and all the golden houses of
the Grand'Place moved in front of me.

Towards morning I calmed down, and I thought that Eitel had nevertheless been
chic, him, a gentleman who knew Latin and Greek, to have followed me
to watch over me; that, without him, fanaticized as I was by this
singing, I might also have been trampled under the horses. I
felt my bones crack and my belly get stoned ...

Shrunken with fear, I approached my lover and scratched everything
gently head. He turned to me.

--Ah! my pretty little beast! he said, hugging me.




Eitel was a musician. He had a piano and in the evening he played. This
bored me very much, because I did not understand anything. If he had played
operetta or café-concert arias, or their "Volkslieder", but that ...

He couldn't stand my talking, it was impossible for me to read; so
what! ... I was reduced to twiddling my thumbs.

Twice a week, a young man came to make music with
him. Those days, I was less bored: I took care of preparing the tea
or hot beer with corinthes, and to cut thin toast with
gingerbread.

Once I spoke to Eitel and he didn't tell me
understood, I tell him:

`` But stop your uproar ...

They stopped with a quack. The young man laughed, his face in the
hands; Eitel looked at me in dismay, but was silent. I felt that
I had committed an enormity, but in what? ...
uproar was something beautiful, that I could not understand?

For weeks they rehearsed the same song. I hummed
parties, and one evening I went to the bedroom to perform
no dance to this music. There was a passage which, another evening
made me run away to sob and think about my dead little sister from
hunger.

They were discussing. The word "the seventh" came up often; then they
clapped the keys with both hands, sometimes with all their
forces, sometimes delicately as if they were touching velvet, and
said: "For me, it's like that", or "I feel it that way". So they
were starting again.

Eitel did not allow me to talk about music. When I asked him to
explain to me what they heard in the songs they played, he
replied, scowling:

--That cannot be explained, you will never understand.

--Because I did not learn it, but if I had learned it as
you...

- No, you would never have understood.

I clearly felt his conviction that I was of a different species, on
which nothing high had taken hold, good at most to serve as their
hobby.

In those moments, instinctively, I stopped talking to you, understanding
that indeed we were and would remain strangers. And a rage
envious took hold of me, because I knew that, if we had taken care
since my childhood to teach me what he had learned, I would have him
summer superior ...

I felt he was mediocre when he spoke of Jean-Jacques. For him, a
of Jean-Jacques' faults was having been a servant: "If he hadn't
not been a servant, he would not have displayed his wounds in front of the world ... "

I got angry at not being able to speak and, my throat
tight, I shouted inarticulate insults in her face. Then i
was saving in our room, crying and kissing frantically
_Confessions _... I was sure that an abominable injustice was against us
made to this ledger and to me ...

My resentment went so far as to think that if this music they played
had been really beautiful, they could not have understood her.

After these scenes, Eitel would go out for a walk. When he got home, he got me up
the chin.

- Come on, say that you were unreasonable again, say that you are a
little bug ...

--No, I am not a critter!




From time to time, I felt a mad need to be among my own.
But my parents inspired me with such estrangement that I confined myself to
bring in Naatje and Klaasje.

They arrived around eleven o'clock in their best clothes. They
however sweated the poor child: Naatje especially, with his hair
brown and rough, badly combed, and her nose turned up. In Klaasje it does not
only beautiful clothes were missing to be exquisite: her pretty curls
blondes and her beautiful eyes with long lashes, her slender little slender body,
were my pride, and I was going to show it to the landlady.

I added for fifty cents of ham to our lunch, and we
made the coffee twice, the Viennese machine containing only two
small cups. Between lunch and afternoon tea, I washed them and
was painting: Naatje needed it the most, the vermin and she
sympathized closely ... Then we tasted tea and, when they
were full of toast, I got out the surprise: little ones
cakes ... By rolling them over one end, I bought a pound of bacon
for the parents.

I stood and watched them walk away: they turned around each time
moment to say hello to me.

My heart was heavy: their poorly dressed little beings were still me
so dear that I often took a few steps forward to
join, to ask their forgiveness for having abandoned them ... So I
wondered if I wouldn't do well to go home with them and
start over the old life ... wasn't it my duty? ...

But the thought of smelling my father's alcoholic breath again and
seeing my mother cunning to get me as much as possible, bristling at me, and
quickly I came home, feeling refreshed to have seen and handled them, but
all the same with the feeling of having been deprived for a few hours
something essential to my life ...

I immediately buried myself in my armchair, and, like greedy,
I was going back to reading.




Eitel was a voluntary employee with a large banker, he received two
hundred francs a month from his father; me, I gave most of my
earnings with us. Our apartment cost sixty francs a month,
piano twenty-five: so we were very tight.

Eitel, with his wardrobe brought from home, still looked
of a hollow and self-infatuated prince. This son of the family was however
brave in the face of ruin, and I was amazed at how this young
man, raised in luxury, knew how to divide our budget: as much for the
rent, as much for food, as much for clothes and
distractions ... If my parents had had the tenth of this order ...
What stupidity I say there! when we had bread or apples from
earth, we were so hungry we were unable to think
that we should also eat the next day ...

A friend of Eitel got him a business intelligence agency. He
received 1 fr. 50 per information and I was looking for ten to twelve per
day: with my air of a wealthy young lady and as it should, it was fine
alone. This is how I got to know the city in all its
nooks and crannies and love it.

Eitel told me I had to find out if people were esteemed
and creditworthy and if their business was successful. I was going to the neighborhood
just ask what I wanted to know. It seems that I was
very clever, because we were sent praise for the way we
take the information.

Very embarrassing things would happen to me, from which I would pull myself out as I
could ... I had to take in the district of the rue Haute des
information on a sale merchant. I enter, two houses from the
his, in a small tavern where, from outside, I had not been able to see the
consumers. But inside there were three women seated, and
at another table a man. The women drank fruit liqueurs.
As I stayed near the counter, waiting for the cabaretiers, one of the
women asked me from afar what I wanted, adding that she was the
"Mrs". I go close to her and tell her in a low voice that I wanted her
ask for information on madam *** the saleswoman of
two houses further.

--Ah! but address yourself to her, there she is ...

And she showed me one of the two women seated with her.

Damn! ...

- Are you talking to me? why is that so?

She was a formidable Brussels woman, about fifty years old, red from
complexion, with large gray bloodshot eyes. She had her arms
on the table and buried his head in it every moment, like someone
falling asleep. His too short hands had fingers like
sausages, with nails edged with a bead of flesh. She turned a
little aside, raised his head to me and his sleepy gaze; in this
movement, the enormous mass of his body made a swirl of gelatin which
would shake under a layer of fat.

As I couldn't take my eyes off her huge body:

--You tell yourself that we could cut three, like you, outside of
me?

`` Three, no, '' I said naively, `` but ...

--Two and a half, you mean ... what do you weigh?

- Forty-eight kilograms.

--As I said: three ... I weigh a hundred and forty-five.

His sleepy gaze measured me with such indifference, and
said so clearly that it didn't matter what I wanted
or what I thought of her, that I didn't matter ... Also
half of my embarrassment disappeared.

--My God, madame, I said bluntly, "I fell in", I do not
didn't know you were here.

--Why is it so? she replied.

--It's commercial information that my brother, who lives
Germany, ask me for you.

--From Germany? I didn't order anything in Germany, that's a
"Carabistouille" ... I buy my goods on the spot, at the
bankrupt traders, or at the end of the season. As there, of
madam, I just bought a stock of corsets ...

The woman she was showing me stared at me from the start.

`` Admit that it is for an information house, '' she said, `` because,
the other day you came to my house, inform you about the great
fur house opposite. I see you beating the city by the way
in all directions. Me, I'm always on my way to sell my
corset stocks: when we saw you once, with your headbands, we
recognizes you ...

Bah! said the second-hand dealer, I don't care what "Madameke" wants from me ...
Can I offer you a cherry or a plum, it's good for the digestion ... this
don't worry why you're coming.

Very embarrassed, I refused, but did not dare to leave without spending: I took
a cup of tea. The saleswoman didn't want to leave her to me
pay.

--Petite, you have a pretty size, but, with a corset, you would be
much more chic: I have your business here, a real opportunity ... ask
madam who delivered them to me.

The man laughed, looking at me mockingly.

For years, I did this job. I was often tired of not
to be able to sleep. After posing all day, I started my
wanderings, and, for three to four hours, I walked to the
outskirts of the city, and from one end to the other without taking the tram.
Eitel told me that I could put in twenty cents every day
in my piggy bank, if I no longer took the tram.

But I was very happy and proud to seriously help make us
live.




Now that I was no longer torn by the need, that I did not have
plus the spectacle of our suffering children, of the drunkenness of my
father and my mother's carelessness, my character had softened a lot,
and, Eitel and I, we lived very peacefully together. It is
complained from time to time of my insubordination, when I did not
hadn't consulted him to buy a veil with my own money or
a pair of gloves. He was shocked and found me undisciplined,
but I saw very clearly that, if he did not insist more,
it was because he said to himself that, in short, I was nothing to him.

As for me, a little more abandonment on his part, and I would have been
acquired, but here it is ... Fortunately, we both had a
great stock of youth to spend. It was manifested in me by a
strong need to cuddle: I climbed onto his knees, and kissed him and
ruffled it until I was drunk. Closed his eyes
like a tomcat, and, through the elongated slits of his eyelids, his gaze
observed me, curious.

However I was not fooled by myself and, afterwards, I wondered what
that I would have done more if I had trusted, if I had dared to
let go to say everything and to think out loud, in front of him, as I
was doing in front of Naatje. This I couldn't, but my impulses were
irresistible.

I still felt at home, in the midst of my abandonments and my
the most complete dullness, a reserve, an ulterior motive not to
get caught up in it. I did, however, inspire unlimited confidence,
he never believed that I could have cheated on him, but he wanted to be free
at the right time: so you shouldn't compromise yourself too much ...




Our sink was too small to be able to wash in two: Eitel is
got up before me to wash.

One Sunday morning when he was washing himself, naked, I observed him from my bed:
the flexible movements of this beautiful body of twenty-five years, slender and
end, interested me.

--You are very handsome, Eitel: if you were poor, you could pose at the
sculptors.

--You think?

--Ah! yes ... Eitel, take the pose of the "Gladiator".

He took the pose from the front

`` That's it ... turn in profile ... now from behind. Yes it's
that, you are quite the "Gladiator"; even the head would be fine: to
your face, we do not see whether you are angry or happy ... There, you
I was very pleased: it is very beautiful, the nude, especially in men;
woman's roundness always makes me want to hit it ...

--Ah! my little beast, you find me beautiful ...
sheets.

He was going to spend this Sunday in a country house, with
compatriots.

I had sent for Naatje: I had a number of socks to
mend. Eitel wore white cotton knitted socks,
marked with two large red letters. The old housekeeper who
had brought them up for him; they started to wear out, and after
each wash, I had to mend them. But, for a while, I had had
a lot of information to take, and the basket was full of
socks that needed to be reviewed.

Naatje and I set to work. At one o'clock we had dinner
and we immediately returned to our task: at three o'clock,
all the curvy socks were back in the basket.
Very happy, I put it on a chair so that Eitel could see it in
returning. It's one of the things he valued the most about me: to love
to sew and mend ...

Then we went to the concert in the Park. Naatje was still amazed to see
the men stare at me, and the Belgians don't send it to you to say,
if they find you to their liking ... Me, I was so made that I
no longer saw him; but, the day when no one looked at me anymore, I didn't
am well seen ... We bought four cupcakes and went home
around five. I made the tea and we tasted. I started to
get used to good food, but Naatje relished it with delight.

--You are now like a lady, you wear a dress with a train, you have a
living room and you eat good things.

--Yes, but often I do not digest good food, I have aches
headache and vomiting ... The doctor who treated me at the hospital
said I've been hungry for too long, that I'll never get over it.

As Naatje did not like to read, we looked at the old prints
of modes.

--You see, we wore crinolines, mother was still wearing them
when I was little ... She used to put on her enormous
hoop petticoat, then went down two floors to get some
water and came up with a full bucket in each hand. Her crinoline is
rose in front and behind; she wore them until 1870.

After supper I gave Naatje a step forward; when I come home, I
laid me down with a book: _Le Père Goriot_. At midnight Eitel found me,
eyes still sparkling with intense happiness, to have such beautiful
things within my reach.

- Did you have fun, Eitel? ... Look at this basket ... all mended ...
Then I read: oh! how good it is! ... I wouldn't have wanted for anything in the world
to be as bad as those great ladies. Do you understand that, to put
his old father on the straw for luxury? Similar conduct
would keep me from sleeping for the rest of my life.

He lay down.

- But you don't say anything ... Didn't you have fun?

--Oh! if ... Look, Keetje, I always told you that we should
to separate. I was all day with Miss A ..., I saw that she
loves me: her father is very rich, but I am from a better family, she
will be delighted to become my wife ... I ask you therefore, in my
interest, to leave here; when i get married i will give you a
amount of money.

I couldn't answer.

--I ask you to do this for me.

--What if I don't? I asked, suffocated.

- Then I will tell you that you owe it.

--Well, let's not make sentences ...

And I turned my back to him.

I did not sleep a minute: I felt misery and ignominy
get back. Then a shame to have to go through this ...
Knew quite pretty, I knew I was also better than many
others ... so why was I being treated like this?

The next day, without speaking, we each went to our work.

At the painter's, where I was posing, I started to cry.

- Come on, little one, what is it?

I told him.

--Peh! don't cry for this i will start a big canvas with
you ... You want to rent a furnished room; but, if you could give a
down payment, you would buy furniture every month, and you would be at home.

- I have a hundred and eighty francs in my piggy bank.

--Oh! with a down payment of this size, it will go by itself.

And he gave me the address of a merchant, where one of his friends, a journalist,
had provided himself to put a small woman in his furniture.

In the evening, I proposed to Eitel to buy furniture under these conditions:
he found it good. I went with him to the merchant, which inspired
trust, and, with my one hundred and eighty francs down payment and in return for
twenty-five francs to pay per month, I was given a bedroom in
walnut.

Eight days later, I left Eitel's apartment to settle in
in a small room. I was crying, very anguished, when the first
in the evening he left me at ten o'clock. But when I looked around
these beautiful brand new furniture that belonged to me and that I told myself that
I could read _Le Cousin Pons_ until morning, without having to switch off
the lamp, when I thought that Eitel could no longer prevent me from doing
come my little brothers and sisters, so I felt a little more
quiet ... but it doesn't matter, I sobbed and called Eitel, in him
promising not to be an obstacle ...

To make it look like he had left me, he affected to go out alone. A
Thursday he came to my house, his hair all frizzy.

--How awful! I said, it's too much ...

- By Sunday, it will be attenuated, the ripple will appear natural ...
Sunday, I want to make my request.

On Sunday morning, he came to my house again, young, dapper, looking
radiant and confident. I was so shocked that for the first time
times, I felt a movement of hatred that I had great difficulty in
repress ... "If I could take him by the skin of his neck and flank him
out the window in the middle of this heap of garbage, what a treat! ... "But,
when he was gone I cried again bitterly, stretching out my arms
to the door.

All day long, I locked myself in and, lying on my back in my bed, I
thought ... This appalling misery, which had gripped me for twenty
years, passed and repassed, with all its abjections, before my mind
anguished ... Then it's been a year since I slept every night in his
arm, that he called me his little beast, that I made him take the
morning of statue poses, and it was all about to end.

I got up and made myself a cup of tea. So, sitting in my folding
caned, I looked around me: the blinds were down, a
red and yellow light filtered in, my furniture was blazing brand new, I
was drinking tea from a pretty earthenware mug with lilac twigs.

"All of this is mine, Eitel has promised to pay ... Now they lend me
always books ... children grow up and work, i
can keep the money I earn, to live ... because it would be
filthy to keep me up with the money that Mlle A ... will bring her:
I don't want it, I cried, my fists outstretched ...
be busy making fuss: he is a smaller woman than me ...
huh, if I could go in there and undo my hair, and say to her:
“Rascal, you took me with real wavy hair; at your place is
artificial, you are wrong about the goods; don't take it,
miss, it's dry like a banana peel, it's always me
who kisses her ... "Ah! my God! what can they say to each other in this
moment? and I, who am here to worry ... Eitel, come back, I will be your
even more cuddly little beast ... How am I going to know something? "

I waited all night in great anxiety, but he did not come.

The next day, after his office, he walked into my house, pale, haggard, and more
a curl in the hair.

--Hey?

He waved his hand and sank onto my bed.

- That crane didn't want you?

--It's because of you, she knew I have a mistress.

I climbed onto the bed and grabbed him tightly.

--My poor Eitel, I can't help it, we have no doubt been
reckless ... Didn't you tell him we weren't together anymore?

- She didn't let me speak. I made my request in the Park: she
Abruptly left me in full view of everyone and joined the ladies ...
The men told me why and the ladies consoled me.

`` Well, for a young lady in the world, she has tact ...

`` People ... I did him a lot of honor, they are upstarts.

I was going to give him an insolence, but he looked at me.

--How pretty you are, my beast, your eyes are like carbuncles ...

And, sitting up:

- Make yourself pretty, we're going to dinner. M ... will be surprised to see us
arrive. As he was surprised to meet me without you, I told him
that we were no longer together: “Damn it,” he replied, “you have
left this little one? Well my dear you were wrong she is
adorable, you won't find any more like that ... If I had known ... "

I put on my bronze dress with a train, my archduke hat with feathers
black curved on the front, suede gloves up to the elbows,
and, quivering and intoxicated with joy, I jumped to his arm as I climbed the
sloping street ... I don't know what I had on me that night, but all
the men around me would have taken me if they could ...

After dinner, we drove to the Bois de la Cambre in an open car.
I felt like I had won the world back.

On the way back, in the car, along Avenue Louise, he hugged me
waist, I laid my head on his shoulder and whispered the song of
Schumann, whom I had often heard him sing: "_Ich grolle nicht
wenn es herz auch bricht_ ”.

I was so moved when we got home that he had to
carry up to the floor.




Eitel was a reserve officer in his country; he had to go back to
do a two-month service. He couldn't leave me any money; he
gave me her wardrobe, very used, but without a stain, without a
crease; instead of passing it on to my brothers, I sold it piece by piece.
piece and made a good price for it.

However, I was very embarrassed that summer: painters work more on
the countryside than the workshop, and I couldn't give anything at home. The
past no longer existed for me; also, when a rich sculptor, who
was well forty, gave me two months of pleasure and luxury, I
replied that I did not like him, and I wondered what "this old man"
thought of me ...

Eitel soon wrote to me that his father had replaced his wardrobe and he
had handed over some money, that we were going to take a little trip.
He sent me a hundred francs, telling me to join him in Cologne.

--Naatje, great God! I'm going to take a trip! I will be able to go to
railroad for my pleasure! I will travel in second! You understand,
I can't get off a third, when he, with his allure of
prince, will be waiting for me at the station.

It was a fever for four days. I was pounding, brushing, and
ironed the dresses I had to bring. I bought myself gloves
fresh, a gauze veil: I put blue favors in my
shirts, blue bows in my pants. I rewrote the feather of a
hat. As I had to take the train at six in the morning and
that the station was at the other end of town, I made Naatje sleep with
me; the daytime woman was supposed to spend the night in my chair, but
she preferred to lie down on the ground. I did not sleep, and, at four
hours we were up. I dressed, shivering with emotion, and didn't
only a cup of tea.

I had an exquisite toilet. A full-length skirt, in
navy blue and brown Scottish lady, with puffy baskets on the
hips, and very draped behind; on the front, from the waist
to the bottom of the skirt, bows of brown velvet; she was more
short behind than in front. The bodice with small basques, in cashmere
plain brown Indian, gathered on the shoulders and neck, folds brought back
in the waist, very sticky little sleeves barely exceeding the
elbows; a brown Regency ribbon belt, with a golden buckle, encircled my
height of forty-eight centimeters; the narrow straight collar, closed by a
brooch of brown marbled stone, allowed my long neck to emerge. A small
hood, in golden brown rice straw, very indented at the back, discovered
my big blond bun with tawny highlights; the pass in front was raised in
a tip, pinch; the interior was trimmed with brown lace
pleated; on the left side of the cap, a large cockade with knots
of brown velvet mounted in a bird's wing; small straps tied with
side under the chin framed my wavy blonde band figure.
On the feet, brown thread stockings with open corners and patent leather shoes. Of
long suede gloves and a silk parasol, with brown and blue reflections,
completed this very fashionable outfit of the time, and to which I had
given this personal stamp that marks the toilets that we do
oneself.

Two young people, one day, characterized my appearance in three words.
Passing by me, they whispered: "Little English horse ..."

At five o'clock, the car was there, and, accompanied by Naatje, I
returned to the station. I had to wait three quarters of an hour. Finally I went up
by wagon; half laughing, half crying, I said to Naatje:

--I am going to see the Rhine; the Germans also speak of their Dome ... I
go see it all! imagine! imagine!

When the train started, I had a shake, all over my body,
which took my breath away. I still shouted a lot of things to Naatje,
through the door.

His gaze surprised me. Until then I had never dreamed of her
was growing up and could have been jealous. She had lived so much in
my shadow, I had struggled so hard to get them bread that I
believed that the rest was owed to me and that she especially, who benefited if
broadly, had to find quite simple that I, Keetje, of which she
finished the dresses and the gloves, I had all that ... However his
look, that day, was a revelation to me.

I spent the journey staring out of the windows of the wagon. At the
painters, I almost always heard talking in my face. I was going
therefore more towards genre paintings and portraits. In my rare
excursions to the countryside I was especially struck by the scent, the
purity and breadth of the air I breathed there, and by the flowers of
fields. But, for the landscape, it didn't mean much to me ...

And suddenly, through the doors of my wagon, the landscape
revealed itself to me in its changing shades: the sky, the clouds and the
dew that beaded on the blades of grass, the animals in the meadows, the
mills, the peasants plowing, seized me and moved me with joy,
a well-being that I had never felt. Maybe, I said to myself,
is it especially beautiful around here? ” And I turned to the others
travelers, to see their impression: several were sleeping, others
read newspapers; a middle-aged Jew devoured me with his eyes
sparkling. I returned to the landscape, and, from Brussels to Cologne, it was
an enchantment.

In Verviers, it was necessary to get off the train for the maneuver. Like I
was looking at the books in the waiting room, the Jew, in me
brushing closely, asked if he could offer it to me. I did not answer
not. I thought I would escape him by getting into another car, but there
came up after me, and for the rest of the way his lustful gaze
distracted me from the new enchantment unfolding outside.

In Cologne, Eitel was waiting for me. As I jumped out of the wagon, fresh and
laughing, how tasteful my dress was, and barely on the ground
men and women noticed my exotic fragility, he had a
movement of pride and kissed my hand like a great lady. AT
the hotel, he took me in his arms:

--My little beast, when we haven't seen you for a while, your
boarder and young girl of the world knocks, and no one ever
might suspect what you are ...

What am I!!! I was ready to cry ... Everything had been so beautiful ...
Finally!!!

We visited the Dome. He said nothing to me: this brand new church,
with his bands of English coming and going ... How to enjoy
whatever it is, surrounded by the rustling of Bædecker which one compels and
footsteps that resonate ... and that confined smell that oppresses you ... I
much preferred Sainte-Gudule and Notre-Dame du Sablon. Eitel in
was indignant.

I went back to the Aquarium twice to see a colored fish
sun, big and fat as a carp, whose evolutions in the water me
surprised. By the play of light, it was sometimes beaten gold,
sometimes in fresh butter, then orange: I couldn't get enough of it.

                   * * * * *

I had posed with a minister plenipotentiary, who was
amateur painting. He knew I went to the Museum a lot.

--And what do you prefer to watch?

--The Dutch masters ... In front of a Pieter de Hoogh, I feel everything
the calm of the great canals of Amsterdam, and Rembrandt puts me back in the
Jewish neighborhood.

--And gothics, do you look at them?

--They annoy me: this humanity is false, it does not smell. When we
throws arrows into the body of Saint Sebastian, his face does not move
not, and, on tables where people are tortured, those who
around them talk about their little affairs ... it's tense, it's
unreal.

--You are mistaken: humanity did not have the sensitivity of
now; then they believed in God, the rest did not touch them
hardly ...

He had a Gothic painting in his studio.

- Come here, look at this Virgin with the baby Jesus. Nothing can
shake her serenity: for her God is there, as palpable as I am here.
Feel me to see if I'm there ... he laughed.

--Thank you, I take your word for it.

`` Well, she also took her word for it.

I looked at her for a long time, but couldn't take in this beauty
placid. "Why did she let herself have a child?" I wondered;
what interest could she find in this game? " Even hands me
seemed limp and good for nothing.

- Anyway, if you don't enter now, go to the
Museum, see and review them: maybe you will come to understand ...

I followed the advice and together with Naatje visited the Gothic halls,
but I could not like this art. To be thus trusted in God and not
to feel the life which is scrambling around you, seemed implausible to me.
Then these frozen bodies, this strange prospect confused me ...

In Cologne, how was it done? I was dazzled in front of the Gothic ones:
the delicate and strong color, and precisely this unshakeable peace,
took entirely.

`` You are ridiculous, '' said Eitel, `` these contorted beings cannot be
beautiful: you pretend, because you pose with painters, to
know ... These paintings are grotesque.

I could not have said clearly why I loved them now, but I
felt penetrated with an exquisite vibration and a gratitude that
always invades me in front of beautiful things.

- Come, I'll show you a beautiful painting.

And he led me to the portrait of the Queen of Prussia descending
a stair. She wears a veil around her head and neck: Eitel me
said it was to hide his scrofula. Ecouelles apart, that I
judged to be a misfortune, I found that the painting like the queen
looked pecorated ...

I dragged Eitel back to the Gothic halls.

- No, leave me alone, these big vulgar heads are
unbearable: can God and the Saints have this
stupid expression?

And in front of the Virgin at the Rose Garden:

--This is a colored picture for children.

--The painter N ... has an old prayer book, he shows me
sometimes the images, which he calls illuminations, taking
he himself delivers it in his hand, lest I spoil it. Well the
little angels in yellow and pink dresses around the Virgin are painted
like these pictures; their little faces have the same freshness and,
how shall I put it, the same enamel ... I find it delicious.

--It's childish.

In front of a very small canvas of an unknown Dutch master, _Die
heilige familie beim mahle_, who attracted me like a magnet, he
laughed again.

`` Look, '' I said, `` they wear happiness on their faces, they are
happy to be together ... and so see, up there, on a piece of furniture, this
pewter coffee maker, and, on this shelf, the box and the book of
prayers ... This red-brown woodwork, I have already seen it on a painting,
at the Trippenhuis in Amsterdam: a whole different picture, but there was this
red, the painting was by ... by ... Pieter de Hoogh.

--You annoy me, it's a household of peasants, devoid of any elevation
of spirit. These painters did not understand the greatness of God and
Saints.

`` But Joseph was a carpenter ...

--It does not matter, art must serve to show us God and the Saints as
beings above others ... Then coffee pots and books of
prayers, and this table set, are ridiculous: all this did not exist at
the time of Christ. If you were more educated you couldn't
admire these absurd things. There is no order in the head
artists, they are ignorant; otherwise they wouldn't paint
anachronisms of this kind.

It nailed her down to me. However, I was almost crying with emotion, and I would have
wanted to embrace the small picture.

"The artist," I said to myself, "who did not know what household utensils
we had in the time of Christ, painted those he saw around him,
to return the happiness that this Holy Family felt in finding each other
at home, in the middle of her intimate objects, after all the troubles
of his trip to Bethlehem and the anguish that Herod had made him
endure. They hadn't stolen it, I thought, and Joseph is a man,
and the Virgin a woman: there is only little Jesus who is different
thing ... However, to see him there, with the bread he took on the
table, it looks like Klaasje when he was little ... Joseph was very chic
keeping the Virgin, even though she was pregnant with another, because, to these
angel stories, I can't believe it ... well, once all these
miseries behind them, they are so happy that they smile
unconsciously ... The painter wanted to show their intimate life, and damn
for the utensils of the time! I would have done the same, and I am
maybe so comfortable with artists because they don't stop at
that silliness ... "

I couldn't detach myself from the little painting. I understood it better than all
the other holiness paintings, and remembered how many
happy the rare times it was good at home around the table:
the day, for example, that the rent was paid and we had a
little money for a hot meal or coffee with buttered toast.
So I had Klaasje on my knees; mother, Katootje; And the others
children were around us, and father cut bread like Joseph.
Each time I got hot inside of me ... "If I could have had one
little more of those good times, I wouldn't be here in the company of this
educated sir, but with whom I feel so foreign, so ill at
at ease ... His Queen of Prussia has the face of a nanny. If he finds
this pretty figure, how can he love mine? Also he doesn't like it
not; but the others find me good and that flatters him. When we
admire me, it is he who blushes with pleasure; his whole being then expresses:
"Eh, it's me sleeping with her, and you would like to be at my
place ... ”I only saw him moved on one day when the stock market fell: then
big tears were running down his cheeks, and he was shaking
like a leaf ... "

                   * * * * *

In Bonn, we crossed the Rhine in a boat and visited the
"Siebengebirge". The countryside intoxicates me, I expand and feel myself caught in it
of joy, love, and a foolishness to kiss that nothing else can
give, and, when slowly we drove up the narrow roads
mountains, and that I saw the whole country and the Rhine spreading, I was
seized with an exaltation that made me forget everything.

--Eitel! how beautiful it is! how I love you for showing me all this!

And I kissed him, taking him tightly.

--My God! so be decent, we have all night to ourselves
to kiss...

                   * * * * *

The next day we continued by boat to Bingen. The Rhine me
left quite calm: in short, I only found him very beautiful between
Bingen and Saint-Goar, during a thunderstorm behind which the sun was golden
the Lorelei.

Never had the difference in our tastes been affirmed as during this
trip. Even the Niersteiner and the Rüdesheimer, which we were going to taste
among the winegrowers, did not make the same impression on us. Eitel the
tasted as if performing a rite, and he became melancholy;
me, they made me cheerful and talkative for half an hour, then
headaches pleaded with me.

Small trout with potatoes cooked in water and butter
melted had my sympathy, I asked for it at every meal, and the
Sweet and sour compotes I liked infinitely as a taste ... but,
like digestion, ah! my children!

I liked very much, in the villages, the small churches with two and with
four towers, which Eitel told me to be Romanesque churches, more
older than the Gothic. I also liked the honest and frank look
of the peasants that we saw working in the vineyards, and, when the
evening, sitting on the thresholds of the houses, they sang their
Volkslieder, I felt like their sister ... Then, along the roads, the
fruit trees that everyone respects amazed me. So try
to plant it, in Belgium, along public roads! is the
would be ransacked when the pears were still only the size of a
hazelnut...

I came back with a lot of sensations that, for weeks, I
delighted myself, and, when the painters returned, I was proud
to tell them that I had seen the Gothics of Cologne, that they did not
knew only by reputation or by photographs.

A Flemish painter even thought it was silly that I should have been able to
go and see these wonders, and not him; but that nothing was right in
our social order; that women, moreover, carry a capital in
she, who allows them to achieve anything ... I was so upset that I
jumped down the plateau, saying he probably regretted not
not possess such capital, but that, if he had had it, he would not
would not have used to go and see paintings, but to make
Fine dinners on rue des Harengs. I knew he was greedy and wasn't going
than in the houses where he was invited to dine. Then I planted it there ...
In the end, I had had enough of all those Flemish and Prussian buggers,
which I had to suffer the muzzle ...




Eitel had found a sponsor and he had established himself for his
account; but he was not the man to drop a deal as good as
information, which brought us at least three hundred francs
per month. They gave him no other work than the bulletin.
to write, since I was looking for them all.

My furniture was paid for. While passing by the merchant, I live, in
sell used furniture from Mechelen for dining room. That me
did he go through his head? I enter and ask for the price.

--Three hundred francs for the whole.

--Will I be able to pay per month?

"Certainly, madame, clients who pay like you are rare."

--So I'll buy it from you; but I have no apartment to place it,
I'll get one.

Eitel was of my opinion that it would be more convenient to have several
rooms, and as business was going ... I went looking
of an apartment. I found one quite to my liking: a large
living room with three windows to the front, a good bedroom to the
garden, a kitchen in the annex, a cellar for coal and
provisions, and an attic for the maid.

The maid? ... Until now I had been satisfied with a woman of
day, but since I had a maid's room, I might as well take some
a...

Marie, the daytime woman, had offended me. She had come first
work, pregnant, then her baby at the breast: we put it in
my bed while she tidied up the housework. Afterwards, she came with two
children, one at the breast and the other trotting in my hand: I kept the
little ones, and assured her that she could bring me six kids, if he
liked to have so many ...

We had, while I was out, stolen from the main tenant,
who was a laundress, all her spoons and forks in
tin; having come to chat with Marie, she had pretended that my
forks and my spoons were hers. Well, Marie had them for him
discounts; she hadn't said anything to me, and I was looking for my utensils. As
I suspected that it was the people of the house who had robbed me,
every time I went out, I called out to Marie from below, him
recommending to close the door, since the silverware was running away. The
laundress was so bored that one day she brought it all back to me,
explaining that she had believed that the forks and spoons
belonged to him, since Marie had let him take them.

Another time, I had received plums that were still green, which I put in
my buffet to let them ripen. While Marie was tidying up the living room,
I tell her, from my bed, not to let her little one eat these
plums, that she would have colic ... And Marie was going to tell
neighbors that I was such a dog, that I was afraid that his little one would take
a plum...

I always made the seamstress eat at my table. What! it was a
girl like me, so I wasn't going to do manners with her ...
When I was out, she and Marie drank the "Kirschenwasser"
that Eitel had brought back from the Black Forest and that he tasted with
compatriots.

I did not understand anything about these little tricks. Eitel opened my eyes.

--You are good! for these people, you are "Madame", and the servants are
the natural enemies of the masters ...

--You think that's it? ... but no, I was poorer than them, and
I never deceived those who trusted me.

Without my wanting it, a distance was established between those whom
I had looked as my equals and me. I had never closed a
wardrobe, I made myself a bunch of keys; and, when the sugar had
gone, I wondered what had become of him. The breach widened.
Often I was still ashamed of no longer feeling comfortable with them, of
to no longer have confidence, and to realize that, day by day, I
loved them less. But why did they treat me as an enemy, and
patroness that we flay as much as we can?

"So they no longer consider me one of their own, and they are going to
to be suspected, because I am no longer poor? ...
poor can love only the poor, and the rich only the
rich?..."

All this made me think for a long time; I was deeply affected by it,
but I could not find a solution: I was no longer like them, and they
made it clear to me ...

                                   *

                                 * *

On the ground floor, a young woman of twenty-two lived in a furnished apartment.
She spent her days in a petticoat and white camisole, her hair
the back. An old doctor visited him twice a week,
while his crew strolled through the neighborhood. Often she
gave supper in the evening: then, it was young people that she
was receiving. The laundress did the cooking and joined the
guests. We sang, we shouted; when supper was over, we broke the
dishes, and the young woman accompanied each object that flew in
bursts of laughter cascading.

When I met her, I asked her why she broke
his dishes. She replied, blushing, that she had lost,
for almost two years, her lover whom she had known at the age of fifteen
years; that they loved each other madly, and that, in a fit of fever
hot, he had killed himself by throwing himself out the window.

--I did not even know he was ill, when I heard that he was
dead. The funeral passed under my windows, with the priests who
sang, while the bells of Sainte-Marie sounded the death knell for
any fly. I was all alone screaming at home ... so I made the
knowledge of the old man ... I am an officer's daughter; I was an orphan,
I was brought up in boarding school, but learned nothing that could do to me
earn my living ... When the spleen seizes me, I give supper, and I
break everything, and I laugh ... I only laugh like this since he died ...

She went to bring flowers to her grave every week, and
came home tottering and defeated. That same evening, she gave supper and
was shattering everything. I understood his pain and moved me with
her, but I didn't understand her way of fixing it.

--Why deliberately commit degrading acts? Life in
already imposes enough in spite of us.

She looked at me, bewildered.

--My God, I never thought so far ... you sum it up in five
dry.

She was still blushing, very embarrassed.

A friend of Eitel became her lover. We used to go out a lot, and
she didn't break anything anymore.

What surprised me most was that she was an officer's daughter and had
was brought up in a boarding school.

                                   *

                                 * *

Eitel's friend complained that restaurant food made him
sick. Eitel was dining with me; he proposed to his friend to dine with us.

--He will pay me three francs per meal, and, as I bought wines from
Moselle and Rhine dear, I will recoup a little.

I had bought a cookbook; the mistress of a painter had me
explained a few dishes, and I had come to know how to cook a
excellent bourgeois cuisine. With the help of my little maid, I
prepared tasty little meals.

--Bah! one more person ... I don't mind.

I was, moreover, a good friend with Fritz; we were called by
our little name, and I often made herbal teas for her bad
stomach.

But then one day, while the maid was setting the table and
I was waving around the stove, I told Fritz who was entering
the kitchen:

--Come on, bring this dish up ...

--Ah! no, who do you take me for! Me, prepare dishes! ...

--But I ride them well.

--Oh! you!

--Ah! me!

I said nothing more, but when he was gone I told Eitel that
I didn't want to cook dinner for his friend anymore.

--I asked him this without thinking, without attaching importance to it:
I thought we were all good comrades together. At the
painters, one grinds the coffee, the other cuts the bread,
manners ... But if he takes me for the cook, he is wrong, and he
will only eat at my place as a guest.

--But see, we win, he pays well, it's a misunderstanding.

--It was a misunderstanding on my part to believe that this gentleman was a
friend. I do not want anymore; and that's all.

--What an unruly creature you remain, Keetje: your look is
distinguished, but you're a savage ...

--I do not care.

--And what wine I bought?

- All you have to do is drink it, there you go.

                                   *

                                 * *

Eitel again wanted to get married. He still made believe that he
had left me and only came to see me very late at night.

I had usually spent the evening with a painter who, for twelve
years old, lived with his mistress whom everyone called his wife. In
coming home, I went to bed and read: it's almost always reading
that Eitel found me. He was annoyed.

--Women who read spoil their minds: they are falsified.

--Why? this does not prevent me from knowing how to cook, nor from doing my
dress from the shirt to the hat, including the corset ... it
it's only my gloves, my stockings and my boots that I don't make
myself. I made you underpants, and I've been mending for years
years your down. As for information, you yourself say that an employee
wouldn't do as well. So how does this harm me?

- I don't know, women who read ...

`` I know you don't do what you want with it.

--You are getting so insolent, Keetje ...

--Ah! you horrify me, and I am very happy not to make a living from you.

--What do you mean?

--No! what you give me I earn by seeking information.
So I am not maintained by you, and we would do better, since
you want to get married, to treat us like businessmen.

- Did you find this on your own?

--But yes, I think about it day and night. When you get married you should me
leave this information: that's all I'm asking you. I would know
write the bulletins perfectly, I do the rest well ...

--This information is mine, and once married, I will see if
you're nice ... I was crying with rage ... If I had this information
to me, I could live without him, and now I want so much the
to leave...




The painter, with whom I often spent the evening, had among his
students a medical student, son of a family, who looked after
literature and painting. This young man also came a lot on
evening at his teacher's house and often drove me home. We were talking about
our readings, he lent me books, and we mostly debated
humanitarian ideas. You see from here, if it was iniquities, like
I fulminated against the bourgeois ...

--Two children are born, house to house: one will be surrounded by
lace, the other in rags; one will have everything in life, the other
nothing. It's an infamy ... a child is a child, and all should
to be equal, and often the poorest is the best and the most
intelligent ... A rich man has a thousand chances to one of becoming
a rascal ...

This language changed me from that of Eitel, for whom the poor were
infallibly fools and crazy people. So I was doing chorus with
the young man, and both of them, heads on fire, eyes sparkling
humanitarian enthusiasm, and often tears in my eyes, but
always dry throat from talking and wanting to express before
the other the idea that crossed our heads, we prolonged our
walk and walked twice around the boulevards that surround the
city, without being able to leave us or be silent.

We once met some friends from Eitel; not to be
suspected, I told him the same evening.

--I am rather happy that we saw you with another: we will not be able to
no longer go tell the girl I'm courting that I have a mistress.

The young man did not speak to me of love.

We had been walking like this for a year, when he asked me if I
wanted to accompany him to Bruges where he had to go for his father.
I accepted with joy.

On the train, we talked endlessly. Along the tracks, the
broom in bloom put me in ecstasy. I had never seen one: this
surprised the young man so much that he was quite moved.

--All children should be brought up and played in the country
freely...

Bruges gave me that feeling of calm which made me love the
Amsterdam canals. We walked along its quays, without saying a
word, as intimidated: my humanitarian ideas were far away ...

The gables sparkled in the water. The women with their coats, the
hood pulled back over their faces, they walked with a delayed step, in this
nonchalance that gives the impression that they might as well do
this race the next day or the following year. Hesitating, they
would strip a pale hand from under their coat, to ring the bell
old doors, black or green lacquered, cracked by the sun, that
other women, in the attitudes of nuns, opened
carefully on wide corridors paved with blue stones and
white, giving off odors of wax and preserves, perfumes
incense, the scent of confinement, closed curtains ...

We were embraced by the ambient torpor, and made long stops
on the benches, in front of the greasy water where the swans sailed, leaving
large circles behind them.

In the alleys, the lace-makers on the threshold of their doors, emaciated and
young people, dressed in rags, crossed the spindles on the floor, and,
under the pins, the laces were sumptuous and
aristocratic. They brought us back to our humanitarian ideas, and
our indignation was great to see the creators of so much luxury
refined to be so dismal. And I told her how my mother was
gouged out his eyes at this elegant profession; how, little, when I myself
woke up at night, I always saw her reclining on the cushion, her
fingers nervously mingling the spindles, illuminated by a small
oil that we called "snot", because you had to blow your nose all the time.
time...

Then we went to the Square to have coffee on a terrace of
restaurant. Men and young people, obviously not knowing any
work, growing like weeds between the cobblestones of the streets
asleep, wandering around like unused quantities and crouching down
sun at the corner of the crossroads, came to ask us for sugar. I them
gave some, with ten cents. Some would tell others, and
soon there was a bunch, who overflowed with joy when they received
two cents. Tears jumped out at me.

- Come, mademoiselle, it is appalling. A society where there are
beings in this state, is infamous, it will be turned upside down one day ...

We climbed onto the Belfry. At the top, a cobbler was making his
shoe mending work. Looking at a distance through the
openings, my knees collided and I was dizzy: my
comrade had to take my arm to get off. Once in the courtyard,
we lingered on the steps of a porch, to revel in
this feeling of other ages, of another life, that all Bruges gives off
and that I love above all.

He called me "mademoiselle", I called him "sir", and we had
each our room.

The next day we set off in a cart for Damme. Along the canal,
he told me about Ulenspiegel and Nele, about Coster. I posed for
Nele, from a sculptor who had explained the character to me for the
pose to take, but I didn't stop until I read the big
book and that I understood Nele and her adorable love. The young
man said:

--Ulenspiegel loved Nele, but he loved Flanders above all,
that is, the idea, and he sacrificed his love. He went looking
of the Seven who were to save Flanders ... When a man wants to fight
for his ideas, he should not burden himself with a woman, says my father, a
man who has a wife died for the cause.

--But it is Nele who saves Ulenspiegel from hanging, claiming him
for husband ... As for your father, he married ...

--Oh! at forty.

"So, at forty, one can abandon the cause?"

This answer disappointed him: his father, for him, was the oracle.

--My father was young and handsome, but poor. No woman liked him.
When he had the fortune, he had only to choose: they ran to him
after.

I felt that he shouldn't touch what his parents told him
taught or told him, and that he was even very picky about
this chapter. Me, I was warned against the parents, and I could have
offend by answering what I was thinking.

We were the same age, but I felt much older: life
had matured me. He was stuffed with theories: we had only to take all
children, raise them well, and all would have been elite beings ...
I didn't know very well, I said like him, but I felt
however that was not it ...

We got out of the cart to pick wildflowers; we
even had loads in the car and was soon in Damme. The
cart stopped in front of the old Town Hall, where the relay was.
We first visited the old little town, dead and abandoned,
having only a few hovels, whose inhabitants, over the
little curtains, looked at us, frightened. I wanted to have a
Flemish hat like the one I had posed with; but there was
no stores in town. We were shown the house of the woman who
made them. I found one in yellow Indian with flowers
red, I put it on right away: it suited me as part of
myself. The old woman was ecstatic:

--It is true that no lady in the city wears her hair like
you, with a parting and waves, and the braids turned on the
neck: it is the hairstyle of the peasant women here.

We went to the cemetery: an old gravedigger was digging a grave.

--But it's scary, there are only old people in this hovel
city ​​... where are the others? have they left, abandoning them
old men?

At the Hôtel de Ville, another old woman at the buffet.

We climbed the rickety stairs into the steeple, and found
still an old man, polishing the bells he said have been ringing since
sixty years.

`` Listen, let's go, maybe it's a spell that has been cast on them ...

And now, right next to me, swiftly, a big bell is
began to strike eleven o'clock. I was so struck that I tumbled down the stairs
at full speed, feeling all the witchcraft of
Ulenspiegel. My companion followed me, no more reassured than me, but
laughing, however, at my scare.

The old woman at the counter watched us with her suspicious eye, while
knitting purple woolen stockings.

- Let's go, please, I would give anything to meet a face
young...

In the cart, I recovered: we descended again in the
meadows, picking flowers, and filling the cart. Then we
looking, all quivering, into our blue eyes and happy to us
to feel and to see ourselves young, we fell into the arms of one of
the other. It was a frenzy of kisses, a paroxysm of sensations ...
and to say that we were in a cart, with a coachman in front of us ...

We arrived in Bruges like two soft numbers ... Ah! good
lunch!...

In the afternoon we still wandered through the city, but we no longer saw
nothing. Even the Lac d'Amour and the Moulin escaped our senses: there is no
had more now than the two of us.

In the evening, in my room, I slipped stealthily the small lock of
the communication door. Him, under the pretext of taking a handkerchief,
opened the door and didn't close it.

We sat down on the open window. A garden with large trees in
flowers, giving off all the scents of spring, stretched out in
darkness. Two cats began to meow madly.

--My God, what a hideous way to love each other, I said.
gutted ...

My companion, thoughtful, did not answer.

- Listen, I have to talk to you, we can't go back. I had
dreamed of a friendship: a pretty and intelligent woman, who would have understood me,
who would have loved me for the idea, who would have helped me in the struggle that I have
company against social inequities. You who have suffered, you
could understand me the best, and here we are ...
You will prevent me from acting, you will be the hindrance, for a man who has
a woman is a paralyzed man. My father always says it: danger,
it is the woman ... they are all petty and vain.

--However, for a year that we have been walking, you have been able to
judge...

--Yes, if I had not met with you this love of humanity, if
I hadn't been able to exchange thoughts with you, you could have been still
prettier, you wouldn't have held me back ... but I won't marry you
never, I do not want any hindrance in my life, and, the day when I will have to
go to the other side of the world to defend my convictions, I
won't hesitate a moment, I'll leave.

- You could take me with you.

- You see, encumber me, paralyze me, hamper the advance!

--But no, Nele joined as a fife on the Gueux de
sea, and since then she has walked and wrestled with Ulenspiegel ...

--Oh! the Nele no longer exist today.

--Then I thought you loved me ...

--Here! unable to understand ... Love, that's it: the idea, the
sacrifice do not exist for the woman. The woman lets herself go to her
direct sensations: I am hungry, I must eat; I'm sleepy, I must
to sleep.

- I want to kiss, I kiss, I said; it is obvious that I
won't go do all of this when i don't feel like it.

--In 48, when my father was young, we sacrificed ourselves for the sake of
humanity ... They were four friends who had banished the woman from their
life. They would have achieved great things, but one got married, then
the other, and thus all were put out of action.

--Well, it's not too late to avoid that. Here is your
bedroom...

He looked at me, surprised and disappointed, but went back to his room.

I lay down, stifling my sobs. "What do I have on me, for
that they love me so little? since my childhood, it haunts me: never a
complete thing, everything is always spoiled for me, why? Why?..."

He heard me cry; he came.

- Come on, understand then, I love you, but I wouldn't want to degrade
this exquisite friendship ... however to have a pretty, intelligent wife
would be ideal ... but I dare not. I never knew a woman, I
feel that I am not made for them ...

- So why did you come to me? I am not the one who got you
sought.

--I did not know the danger I was running with you, for the woman is the
danger.

I kissed her, I promised her not to stop her from following her
road. Well, no, something was broken ...

Was it the anguish he had suffered, was it his inexperience? it was not
the night of love that I had dreamed of ... my first night of love! ...

I loved her madly: her warm and musical voice, her open laughter,
his long hands which he moved as he spoke, his exquisite naivety, all
his frail and delicate being at last, and now he had humiliated me with his
mistrust and fears ...

Now I was thinking, and I was amazed that he did not have me
again talked about my position, which he knew perfectly well.

The next day we were in the hospital and in the churches, to see the works
art, but I didn't care, painting and sculpture, and neither
Madonna and Child by Michelangelo, nor the weeping women of Memling
impressed me: I had many other concerns.

Then, to see him so completely taken over by art, no longer thinking of our
painful explanations of the night ... which calmed me a little,
it was the tone in which he had spoken, like a little boy who
repeats a lesson: I had the vague feeling that all this was only
glued to him by careful hands ... However, he is there to emir
in front of these paintings, which represent sensations from four
centuries ...

--But you don't see anything ...

You!

--This means nothing to you?

You!

- No, I don't care.

On the way back, by train, he tried to make me forget, but I did not
more, and I went home sheepishly ... Eitel had not noticed
my absence.




I did not know Dostoyevsky. André lent me _Crime et Châtiment_.

I had suffered so much, fought so much, had to defend myself against life
and the villainy of men, which I understood this book as the expression
even injustice. Nothing escaped me. Catherine's ridicule
Ivanovna, when she dances starving and deliriously, in the street
with his children, the lamentable grotesque of this scene, made me more
cry and leap in shame that no other passage ... Yes, misery you
drink of ridicule: how many times I had been the butt of jokes,
because of my worn-out shoes or my sordid hat ... and had I not
I myself didn't have the ridiculousness of spreading my blond hair on my back,
silky and curly, a true queen's adornment, as she flaunted her
education and his lady manners. A poor girl who dares to flaunt her
treasure!...

As for Sonia, I thought it was me: her shyness in front of
men, I had it - I still had it, but I was hiding it - and its
gesture was identical to mine: we had consciously sacrificed ourselves,
knowing and seeing in which mud we were sinking, from where no one
would have pulled us, on the contrary ... Too bad for us, he
was necessary, and yet it was a waste, said Dostoevsky ...
pure loss? I do not know. They did not become great lords,
but they did not die of hunger! ...

She had an education: I didn't have any, and our ways of acting
were however the same ... Strange ... How is it?

I had already read a lot, talked a lot with painters and with
André, and above all a lot of thought and thought. I knew perfectly well
appreciate this book, and was upset: so my case was so frequent
that great men like this writer were inspired by ...
I had always believed that my case was exceptional: that this shame
had fallen on me because I was a tiny creature, who did not
didn't matter, and that I had only to accept it as a thing for
which I was born. And now this lady and this young lady
nobles, who knew music and spoke French, had
had to go through where me and mine had always been dragged ...

I didn't understand anything anymore. I thought that if I had had
education, no one would have dared to treat me like that ...
so not that yet? With education, we did not manage to
earn an honest living, and, if you have an education and not
money, you are treated with lewdness anyway ...

Ah! but wait! If Eitel still dares to miss me! ... And even André,
Would he consent to this sharing if I had money? ...
however ... There you go! what is all this? ... me, I do not
would share with anyone.

I was tense, to realize everything and torture myself. I
believed in an anomaly of my mind, for I saw men around me
and women to move, with ease and pleasure, in the most difficult situations.
more equivocal ...

I wanted to be clear about it and know what another woman, in the flesh
and in bone, thought. I took with me _Crime et Puniment_, at a
young lady where I was going to pose and who loved me very much, she said. It
was thirty years old, and belonged to the good bourgeoisie; she had
brothers and sisters younger than her, whom she spoke to me with love. I
He read the passages relating to Sonia's prostitution.

- What would you have done, mademoiselle?

--Oh! I wouldn't have degraded myself that way.

--But what would you have done? You wouldn't have let die of
hungry your little brothers and sisters ...

--I would have worked.

--But what if you hadn't had a lucrative enough job? Work
of a poor girl is not paid enough: no way to feed
seven to eight people ...

--So then, my honor above all!

--You could not let them starve, however, if you
had any means of salvation.

--That way does not exist for an honest woman, and God does not have them for me.
not given to keep.

--Ah! if, miss, as long as you understand that without your
intervention, they, the little ones, would starve, any way,
it would have to be used to save them.

--No way! my virtue is mine, and I must not sacrifice it to
nobody.

--It's like people who say they wouldn't sacrifice their
soul...

- Obviously not.

`` Well, if I believed in the soul, it would pass through it like the rest.

She shrugged her shoulders.

--You cannot understand, Keetje. You shouldn't read books
unhealthy, which ask questions that should never be asked.

--The book does not ask the question; I put it down.

--You are wandering ...

We fell silent, both in a bad mood.

This conversation had taken me out of myself, but strengthened in my
conviction that Sonia and I had done well. I felt however
forever marked, and I knew it would haunt me, that all
my impressions and appreciations on life would be affected by
this stain that I had to undergo ... Now that I surrendered
account, I was shaken with love and hatred for humanity.

I no longer wanted to go and pose with this young lady, and I changed
sidewalk when I met her. "God did not give them to me at
keep ... ”What a monster!

I devoured all of Dostoyevsky, but none of his books, which I all love,
did not give me the impression of _Crime and Punishment _... I would have wanted so much
find out if Sonia, after having followed Raskolnikof to Siberia, tortured herself
like me; if, despite her conviction that she had acted well, she
also felt this stain on the forehead, which indicated it, if only
herself, put her apart, and made her feel uncomfortable
everywhere and with everyone.

Through my conversations with André, I began to understand that
times had changed, we analyzed ourselves more, we cared more
of oneself, and that undoubtedly, for that, I could not accept, with
Sonia's resignation, my downfall. I was sure, however, that
I would have done it again if I had had to, that I had nothing to buy back;
but I revolted, and constantly I began to ruminate on everything ...

Sonia wrapped her head in a lady's cloth handkerchief, and turned
his face on the side of the wall, while his shoulders were shaking
chills. Her mother-in-law knelt in front of her, and they
asleep in each other's arms ... It looks good ...

With us, the little ones ate, like sharks, the food that
I reported, and when the light was out I cried
gently on my old sofa, my head under the blanket so as not to
to be heard, and until the morning I was only distracted by the
snoring my dad, drunk ...

Sonia forgave her father. Me ... my father, dying in the hospital, had
instructed Naatje to tell me, all alone, that he would like to see me,
that he had something to ask me ... In agony, he inquired
at all times, with the nursing sister, if her daughter Keetje
was not there yet ... I did not go.

As Sonia acts simply, without sentences, resigning herself to
the inevitable! How beautiful she is, how tall she is! ... Me, I
mouth, I stamp my feet, and every time I see my mother, I put everything
upside down, and I make this pretty little girl cry and shake
creature. I know, however, that she agreed to it, like me, the knife
on the throat ... There, I know that, and, instead of loving her, I hate her,
as if she, more than me, would have had the right to let them die of
hunger...

She knew my adoration for our children: on whom could she
better to count on me? She believed that afterwards I would have loved her
more, as she loved me more, and lo and behold I dug this
insurmountable breach between us ... Each time, I make him feel his
infamy, to the point where she ended up denying everything; and i know i have it
torture, and I know it is unfair and unspeakable ...

After these scenes when I slammed the door and I'm sure
the stairs, I want to go back, take her in my arms, tell her
that she can always count on me, that I would do it all over again for her
all alone, and that I beg her forgiveness on my knees ... on my knees, mother,
knees, bare, because it hurts a lot to be on my knees ... But I
do not need to make so much fuss: one look would suffice, and she
would put me on her heart, like her favorite that I've always been ...

In the street, raising my head to the window, where I know it all
weeping, I still look at her nastily. What a nasty creature I
am ... there is a margin between Sonia and me ...




But what did I have? My hair was falling out, my throat was sore
harassed, I had bags under my eyes, I was in pain every
months of excruciating pain; I was irritable and immeasurably
sad; fears and trances obsessed me ... then I suffered
morally. How could André, who loved me, tolerate this sharing?
I was at my end and decided to talk to him. But how to approach this
chapter we avoided?

In the evening, when he came, I was very downcast.

--It is not cheerful at home, Keetje, you have lost all your liveliness, you
are there without energy ...

- I am ill, I do not know what I have ...
painters, they tell me: "What a head you have, you must take care of yourself ..."
what was your anatomical bite?

--I had asked my head of department; he said to me with a sneer: "That's it
is, you will die of syphilis ... ”But, as he hated me, because of
my ideas, and because I distributed my salaries to the sick
internally, I believed in a wickedness. Later when I got to know you
I went to consult M ...; he assured me it was a shot without
importance. I asked him if there was any danger for the woman;
he answered me very seriously: "None."

`` So that's not it ...

And, my head on the table, I began to sob.

--André, I can no longer live like this, I can no longer share myself. This is
odious! it is odious! How do you cope with this situation? Is it because
that I told you about my life? To you, I thought I had to say everything.

--Oh! Keetje! for me you are pure: how would i make you responsible
societal crimes? You are one of his victims ...

--Victim of society ... here, I am a victim of men ... and you, for
fight society, you don't have to inflict this sharing on me
myself.

--The day when the cause I defend needs me, I must be
free.

--If you do not despise me and if you love me, you do not have the right to
impose such torture on me.

--I shouldn't have met you, I'm not made for women:
he's a friend I should have, to walk with. I will not hesitate
a moment entered friendship and what the woman offers us.

--With what you would give me for L's friendship ...?

--L ... is more or less, but the true friend, with whom we struggle, must
have the first place in our life.

--Well, not for me: you are my first good ... maybe once,
when it came to the little ones ...

--What I struggle since I know you, not to let me
to invade by this inferior feeling which is the love of the woman, you do not
have no idea ... but you can't understand. The woman believes that she
has only to give oneself to abolish all the other duties of life. It
do not want us to live for a cause, for an idea ... My father ...

--Your father got married, had children, and made more money
than he needed to live.

--He understood that, without money, one is a slave of the bourgeois, and, as
he had to make a living, instead of being able to devote himself to the cause of
humanity, he wanted me to have money to be independent and
to be able to act in complete freedom.

--That's very beautiful ... However your father did not want you to talk to
domestic workers: loving the proletarian a little from a distance ...

--We must free them without their help: they do not know, this
are employees at the mercy of those who employ them.

--They do not know! I don't know probably either? ... André, this
is not all that ... My life is intolerable: if you cannot
leave a little place in yours, let's go our separate ways ... don't believe
that I bring cunning to it, that I want to accuse you because I
know you love me; no, but I can't, I don't feel anymore
miserable than before ... I am undoubtedly doomed to abjection, so that
even you, you leave me there for theories ... At the end you will give me back
crazy woman. One must leave me to marry a dowry, the other for his ideas
humanitarian. Still go for that poor character, but you ... No, this
is not all that! ... it is not all that! ... Human suffering is
made of special cases and, under the pretext of working for the masses,
to create pain around oneself is harshness or hypocrisy ...
You are neither harsh nor hypocrite, you are distorted ... Good God, André, look
so next to you; you are always in theories, or you do
nicely part of this society that you despise ... you are not
freed from his prejudices, that is the whole business.

--That's right ... my father is right: the woman is incapable of
sacrifice, she thinks only of herself.

--It's pretty, the sacrifice you impose on me ... Besides, you've already got me
said all this on our wedding night ...

I wiped my eyes.

- Let’s stop there: I have never lived enough in the clouds not to
not be embarrassed by the garbage around me, although I must have walked there
full feet ... I am more despicable than before, if I continue this
messy existence ... What is most heartbreaking about all of this,
I said, starting to cry again, it's because my beautiful love is wasted, and
that, whatever happens, the two years of torture that I have just
pass, will never take me out of my memory.

I paced the room, holding my head in both hands.

- Listen, Keetje, I have only my two old parents and you in the world; I
love you completely, but there is so much to do in the current social state,
that one does not have the right to think exclusively of oneself. You give me the
the purest, most complete happiness; when i am with you he
I sometimes forget everything and only love to look at you and listen to you ...
Can I just let myself go and abandon those who are suffering? because the
happiness absorbs, makes selfish ...

I did not know what to say: he was right and he was wrong, how
go out? ... Ah! Damn! we have the right to have a share of happiness
and to love each other, unequivocally between us ... Me above all, I must not
not to forget those who are wronged ... If we put up barricades, I am
sure to climb them before him ... how good it must be to get killed
for a good cause, and the most beautiful cause is that of humanity: we
maybe two for that ...

Did he see what was going on in my feverish head? He locked me in his
arms.

--Keetje, my wife! always keep me ...




At that time I read all the Zola that had appeared. He didn't move me
not. I had the feeling of I don't know what superficial paint,
of a reality invented or observed on the surface; it seemed to me that he
had relied too much on his intuition, especially when it came to
people ... Intuition will never deliver the soul of this being to you
smelly that wanders there in front of you ...

I told myself that I was ignorant; but was I ignorant? ... Ma
faith, I'm sure I know this differently than Zola ...
Better yet, I felt that I would never have understood or penetrated the
people from a different class than the one I had graduated from. Even if
henceforth all contact between those in my class and me had to cease, I
had them in the marrow, and I would never assimilate the soul of
other. So Zola ... where do they claim to know us if
easily? We do not think we know those of another class: from there
our constraint before them; we never know what they us
reserve, and in advance we are afraid, as of the unknown.

André preferred _A Rebours_, by Huysmans: it was above my
scope. I did not know that life also leads the rich of the earth and can
lead them to the strangest acts: I had no mercy
of them. For me, Des Esseintes was a vicious unforgivable. "When we
had everything to be honest ... ”was my eternal theory. The
beauty of style did not yet exist for me.

André also spoke to me about Saint-Simoniens, Fourier, the abbot of
Lamennais - they were a dead letter to me - from the Phalanstère ... Ah! the horror!
Everything in common, not being at home ... How to meditate and follow
a thought? I felt an insurmountable antipathy for the
Phalanstery, and I would have preferred the desert.

André was a pretty good theorist. So I started to know this
the artificial side of man; but, at home, there was also a real and
great kindness. Victor Hugo and Michelet were his gods: he made them to me
read. Michelet, in _La Femme_, annoyed me: I had to pick up, on
a bench on the boulevard, a woman and introduce her to her home ...
_Notre-Dame de Paris_ had stunned me. However I would have liked
to know a mother in the case of the Leper, when she had been robbed of her
girl, to see if she could have, in her pain, spouted all these
beautiful sentences ...

I remembered a dead end neighbor who had lost a little girl
with blond curls: she often made me come, because I
recalled his little one. She twirled my curls on her fingers and when
she lifted my head by the chin, I noticed her surprise that this
was not the figure of her child that she had before her. All in
going about her housework, her mouth contracted, and two furrows of
tears ran down her cheeks and fell on her blouse.
She said nothing and continued her work; then she took me by
hand and took me out; the door closed, I heard a "han"
prolonged ... I told André that this woman deeply felt her
pain, since, little girl, she communicated it to me and made me feel
throw around my mother's neck, sobbing; but that Hugo could sing to me
whatever he wanted, it didn't move me ...

--Ah! misery! illiterate, you want to judge similar brains!

- Their brains, no; their hearts, yes. They know the song, but
do not know how to set the tone.

He looked at me in bewilderment.

- You now imagine yourself to be a woman who knows how to discuss with me; you
think you're an intelligence, but your brain is that big ...

And he was showing a little tip of his finger.

--To touch Victor Hugo and Michelet, you need your ignorance to
loser. Don't talk to me anymore, you annoy me.

--Ah! you annoy me at the end: if I'm so stupid, let's shut up and
let's look at the trees, moreover I prefer them to Victor Hugo.

With both arms raised, foaming with anger, he rushed at me, then
stopped, his mouth wide open.

- Shut up, ignarde, stupid ... pitiful pecorosis.

And he was going to shake a tree.

--Bah! it's okay, just touch me ...

These discussions and trappings usually took place in the forest.
de Soignes, which we cross at least three times a week to
to have dinner in Groenendael. We walked, after these altercations,
everyone from our side; then I moved closer to him.

--André ... let's see ...

And, with real tears in his eyes, he said to me:

--It's a shame! there is nothing to do with women: you already have
read so much, and you speak of Hugo as the most ignorant or the least
understanding of creatures. I thought that by chatting like us
let's say you would have ended up feeling the greatness of this unique poet.

- By chatting ... Do you think it came to you chatting? You got
teachers for everything, since the age of four ... Talking ...
you're kidding me ... yes, if i had your base, but i only have my
impressions ... I understand, however, Jean-Jacques and Dostoïevsky: they
make me tremble up and down, but Hugo ... he gives me the
feeling of a very sophisticated machine that you trigger ...

He threw his cigar violently.

--Ah! no! Finally, you will never be more or less.

--If I'm more or less for you, I'm going, I don't want to, I
want to be everything.

--All! thin!...

--All ... all or nothing.

And, in my turn, I burst into tears.

--My God, don't cry, you can't help it. I'm a bully ...

--Ah! no! Ah! no! not that ... I don't want your pity: my brain
worth yours.

--Ah, for example ... You imagine that, you who know nothing, who do not have
learned nothing.

`` You said earlier that it must come to me while talking ... Besides, I
didn't learn what you learned, but I saw a lot more in the
life than you, and it made me understand things that you don't
will never understand, because you have to have lived them to feel them.
You know one thing, me another ... But we shouldn't
so angry, I'm too afraid to lose you.

--Oh! no, what an idea ...

And, holding each other by the waist, we continued through the forest,
thinking more than cuddling us.

In the evening, returning in the dark, we clabbered happily on the
fat bourgeois, whom we had seen stuffing themselves.

Then he climbed a signpost to see if we were in
the right way, while I stood on my tiptoes, a
flaming match raised towards him. He was sliding down, circling around me
waist and, under his kisses, bowed me in the snow or on the
dead leaves. We often came home at two in the morning,
stiff, but peaceful and happy, with all the scents of the forest
on us.




--Keetje, you must not stay like this: you speak an impossible jargon,
with an English accent which disconcerts in a Dutchwoman. Your letters
are very good, you put all your soul into it, but what a spelling! Here is
the address of a teacher who teaches grammar, I took it
on a sign posted at his window; go and inform you.

I was there and soon began the lessons. The teacher was a
young lady four to five years younger than me; she had to explain to me
what a verb, an adjective, a noun was ... In the beginning, I
did not understand my inferiority: I did not know that these first
elements were the same in all languages. But when I was
realized, my embarrassment became so strong that the young lady noticed it,
and, to put me at ease, she told me that she gave the same
lessons, in the great world, to married ladies whose education had
been neglected because of their health or for other reasons, and
many understood less quickly than me. I was grateful to him for wanting me
make me feel comfortable, but still felt my pitiful ignorance.

After a year, when I could manage, André found that
now i should also take a history teacher and
geography. I got one from a large boys' high school. He explained to me
first, on a geography map, what the small
zigzag lines, some representing mountains, others
rivers, etc. I couldn't believe my eyes, but didn't say anything.
When I understood, he began at the beginning, and he unfolded
before me the whole history of Egypt, then the Medes and the Persians.
While telling me, he made me follow on the maps, so that I
got it right in my head where the events had happened.

It was the biggest revelation of my life. Spelling, in short,
bored me, but here I got carried away and left at full speed. To measure
that everything became clear to me, I saw the countries before me, with their
inhabitants living their life, with animals and things ... The flood
du Nil made me cry out with them: "That's it, it's invading everything ..."
footbridges and small dikes transported me to Holland, and I
lapping, barefoot, in the silty water ... But the corpses we
put for six weeks in brine, like cod, and whose
the brain was pulled with hooks by the nostrils, and all
the horrible preparation they had to undergo before they were ready for
swaddling, gave me real nightmares.

André laughed at the impression it all made on me.

- You will have more than me: we, we are told these things
when we are too young, when we want to play marbles, and
printing is zero.

--It doesn't matter, if I had been able to learn young, I could now
take care of less elementary things, because I can see that, if we
wants to know, life is barely enough.

When we got to the Bible, I was more comfortable: I
knew very well, but I had been taught it as the word of
God, and my common sense revolted against this God who said: "I
made you commit this iniquity to avenge myself on you, for I
am the vengeful God. ” Now that she was represented to me as
the history and literature of a people, it interested me a lot.

My mentality changed completely: I saw further, I discovered
new beauties and ugliness, and I began to understand that if
misery is the greatest of all calamities, there is also
other pains than those of the crying stomach, and that it is not
all that to have warm feet.

Before my studies, everything manifested itself to me through sensations, on
which I couldn't put into words, and when I
found, I dared not say them, believing myself to be stupid and absurd ... Now
I managed to express my ideas clearly, namely to take the
things, to take possession of myself, and no longer to fear
to see ridicule, as before Eitel used to
make. I was already speaking quite differently, I was choosing my terms, but
André found that my accent was still too foreign, and he was afraid
that I did not take the Belgian accent.

--You should go to the Conservatory, but we must not
know your position. You will say that you are a stranger, come to
Brussels to learn French; with your "english lady" look,
it will pass. But it is necessary, before, to take some private lessons
to facilitate your admission. I know a former student, when
I was studying the violin there, - because, you don't know, I wanted to become
violinist, but my parents opposed it, - this former student is
instructor, she's as bad as a mange, but she will give you
good lessons, she knows the job well. It all worked out
after. I had to buy a Merlet and we started with readings
aloud. Not a sound was exact, but I articulated well. Then,
she made me syllabic and work with balls in my mouth, to
soften the speech and make me speak with my lips. I had to say
"_Mmme ... nnne ... pppe ..._" I set about it with a passion to have
tired yawns of the jaws, and blood to the head, and eyesight
veiled. I thought I could force nature, make up for the years
lost. My progress was immense, and after a few months my
teacher introduced me to the Conservatory, like a young girl who had come to
Belgium to complete his studies: I was already more trimmed than
second year students.

Then began the study of the classics. It was another door that
opened for me, with two doors, on a splendid life to which I
initiated me. I had delusional sensations and artistic emotions without
mixed. My whole being was tensed in a breaking vibration. Then
my pride knew no bounds ... What! I was from one
school! Me, I was initiated into what humanity had produced more
Student! Me, I worked on my gestures, my attitudes, my laughter and my
smile ... I was rambling about it; I was punctual, scrupulous. When the
teacher was talking about a book or a play, I was buying it. As
I was on a tight budget, my dresses were continuously
repainted, my hats retyped; all my money was spent on books and
to lessons, because I thought it absolutely necessary to learn
English and German.

Besides, I was soon to pay dearly for this happiness. I became feverish,
night sweats exhausted me. Then the class teacher
superior, where I was now, did not like me: she found me
too old, I didn't have enough chest and hips ...

--You are an artist, intelligent; but, between us, in the theater it is necessary
please men, and I don't believe you do.

I had read _Nana_, and I remembered that, on the boards, not having
Knowing how to give a note, she hitched her hip. I asked the
teacher if that was it, the theater ... His nostrils twitched with
spite: I had irreparably spoiled my business with her.

However, I was working very hard. If at first I hadn't thought
than changing my accent, now I saw a future in the theater.
Very often, I brought in a job, outside of my imposed roles. The
teacher and students were amazed at the truth with which I
interpreted it.

It was _Les Deux Pigeons _... How not to have death in the soul,
when you love and one of the two wants to go for an adventure?

Or _The Dog and the Wolf_. I thought of the necklace that strangled, for
centuries, a part of humanity, which the strongest coaxed into
occasionally throwing it some reliefs ... Chicken bones, chicken bones
pigeon...

Then _Rolla_!

    Poverty! poverty! you are the courtesan,
    It was you who pushed this child in this bed ...

You understand the emotion I put into it ...

I had come back from my prejudices against Victor Hugo. I had
studied with passion:

    The child had been shot twice in the head.

I was ready to climb the barricades and destroy all the
roses of Saint-Cloud. Destroy the roses! ... me who closes my eyes
of emotion, with the scent of a French rose!

Then _The Consciousness_ with Cain, and this repetition: _Has the eye
faded away_? Goosebumps ran through me in unspeakable fear.

But _Booz_!

    The shadow was nuptial, august and solemn...

My whole being blossomed in aspirations towards the sun, towards
fields of golden wheat, towards the perfumes and the stars of summer nights ...
I was dragging André through the Sonian Forest; but it was winter,
the nights were dull and didn't give me that back.

This is how I arrived at this vibration, at this truth that
surprised my classmates and my teacher.

I believe that I owe a lot of the sensations that I communicated in this way to
my gift of vision and evocation ... I did not know music.
However, finding myself with André at the concert, I suddenly felt
the scents of the country, and I saw a clear stream meandering through
through meadows.

--André, it looks like there are flowers and water in this music.

--But there is all that. It is the "Pastoral" ...

I had no idea that Beethoven had wanted to return everything I
had just seen and smelled ...

Long before Duncan, I took steps on any music,
and especially on the funeral march of Chopin. This march! ... When André
was dead, I had several times the vision of his burial, with
dancers in ample purple cloaks, who, in front of the hearse,
performed Chopin's funeral "dance".

If I told my comrades that I saw unfolding in front of me, with
color, gestures and scent, what it was about in my roles,
almost all of them laughed; others believed in a pose, and all
this way of feeling was unpleasant.

--You know, Oldéma, with this gift of evocation, how will you play
the Toinette of _Malade Imaginaire_?

--And you, without this gift, how would you say Booz?

All this work, which for me was a source of joy and pain,
was a task for them: apart from Marthe, the only comrade
I had made myself at the Conservatory, none had the passion ...

                   * * * * *

A little before the competition, I began to worry about the look that
I would have on the stage. The make-up made me ugly, my thinness worried me.
I wanted to know. I bought a full arsenal of red, white,
cold-cream and pencils of all colors, and one evening I said to
Naatje that I was going to dress and paint myself like for the theater.

I turned on all the lamps in the house, in my bedroom.

`` Now stand there in front of the door, and when I come in
will look at me well to see the effect that I produce.

The hairdresser had told me how to go about it. When my figure
was made and my hair pulled up only with a blond tortoiseshell comb,
I surrounded myself with a large white Chinese silk shawl, tone-on-tone embroidery
tone, and I made my entrance; Naatje looked at me in silence; then, with
astonishment in her eyes and annoyance in her voice, she said to me:

--I thought the makeup did not suit you.

- Doesn't it suit me? I said, going over to the mirror cabinet.

I was just stunning, and I looked candid and fresh
that I didn't know myself. My arms were too thin, my
salt shakers too hollow; but my neck, my neck and my chest, fine
and surprisingly young. The line of the body, especially from the back, was of a
great elegance, and my tapered hands had character.

I began to make gestures and graces in front of the mirror, and to
declaiming tirades of comedy and tragedy; then I went out
and re-entries, with great reverence.

Naatje said nothing, and for a moment I saw her look at me with a look
hateful.

--Naatje, if my teacher saw me like this, she could not, with the
best will in the world, find myself devoid of charm; but she me
would fill my salt shakers with a paste and stick a corset with a throat on me
and hips, and my gestures and the beautiful salutes sideways and around,
before leaving the room, would no longer have the flexibility to
now ... look how elegant it is.

And I bowed in beautiful salutes from both sides, like queens
before leaving an assembly.

I quickly removed everything before André arrived, and I sent Naatje
that he didn't like.

--Your sister is a narrow-minded viper, who takes her ugliness for
virtue ... If she does not want to learn a trade, she will no longer come
at your place ... we will always have it on our backs.

It pissed her off, but she didn't have enough pride to
no longer coming: she thought she had become a young lady, because she
was finishing my toilet.

When he arrived an hour later, I was still so under
the impression of having seen myself so beautiful, that he asked me what I had.

--You throw rays ...

We had a long night of love ...

                   * * * * *

Despite my teacher's annoyances, I held out until the competition.
She did everything in the world to eliminate me, but a student came to her
ask, in front of the director, if she would not like to make me
to hear that I was crying there behind a pillar ...
that she introduced me, and, more dead than alive, I declaimed the
_Imprecations of Camille_.

The whole time I was on set she talked with
animation to the director; I had the revenge of hearing this one make the
reflection:

- She's the only one who knows what she's saying; and she has no accent ...

Then to me:

- Very good, mademoiselle, you can compete.

But the professor tortured me so much with his bickering and his
malicious observations, and my night sweats exhausted me at this
point that, at the end of my resistance, I gave up the competition. Then i
also said: "If I fail, she will take the opportunity to send me back, and I
want to continue working: this competition will not increase my knowledge ... "

As soon as I gave up, she became charming.

- Believe me, my child, the theater is not your business: there is no
not just the stage, there are the backstage ... You don't have what it takes,
you had to wield the pen instead!

I believed in a last darkness.

A student said to me:

- Fool, contest, she did this only to fix everything
attention to the little O ... and allow her to win a first
price, and this product for old gentlemen won't get it if you put up with
the part.

But I couldn't take it anymore; then André told me he didn't want to
that I became an actress, that that would destroy our happiness ...

So I left for a cure.

                                   *

                                 * *

When I was little, I had a very pretty singing voice, and,
fourteen years old, I sang, to put our children to sleep, all the songs of
school first, then I improvised.

A flirt, who was our dead end neighbor, listened to me, delighted, seated
in front of his door; he imposed silence on all the kids too
for a long time that I was shouting; afterwards, he said to me, very moved:

--It's beautiful, you are an angel from heaven when you sing ...

And he wanted to kiss me, but I was running away: even on Sunday, his
smell repelled me.

Growing up, life had shaken me so much that I no longer had
never sung.

I heard at the Conservatory the singers exercising in modulations
that charmed me so much that I remembered my voice. Mrs R ..., my
diction teacher, with whom I always took lessons
private individuals, had studied singing; I spoke to him in my voice
sung.

--Ah! ... let's see that.

She sat down at the piano and made me give a few notes, then a scale.

--Oh! Oh! it's a real Falcon voice, and a rare timbre ...

--So I'm going to sing!

- Listen, mademoiselle, I had two first prizes, one for singing,
the other of declamation; but I had learned music theory when I was twelve, and
since then I have continued. You are twenty-nine, a voice
exceptional, very wide, naturally posed, a very beautiful medium
and solid; you are well advanced in the diction, only the time
you will miss to complete both studies, and I am afraid that you
do not fail. Think ...

A rare voice, a very beautiful tone ... What a prospect! ... My gifts do not
would not be there completely in negligible quantities, I could
to prove that they only wanted to be developed, that he was in me
to produce beautiful things ... and I owe this only to myself ...
My visions, later, would no longer be just nightmares of
misery and infamy. I could remember: "It was I who was
Armide, or who was Phèdre. " We will say: "Do you remember the great
Oldema? she made us shudder, she gave us feelings of art
and full life. Ah! she was admirable! ... "

Well, why not! ... Why, me, could I not match the
better? They say I am very artist, and I have the gifts! If I can them
cultivate, why not me! ... say! why not me.

I wandered like this, walking too fast in the street.

The next day I took Mrs. R ... aside and told her that I had decided
to enter singing, that I felt I was able to carry out the two studies
front, that I expected that she would like to continue giving me
private diction lessons.

--As you wish. I will introduce you to my former teacher
song.

When he heard my voice he was surprised that I hadn't
occupied earlier. Mrs. B ... told her that I was twenty-five, that
I was very hardworking and understanding.

--Well, well, with this organ and work, she will sing at twenty-nine
years, she will still have twenty years before her ... it is worth it.

I kept quiet.

I entered singing and music theory. Music theory! ... I did not know
a note: they were for me hieroglyphics, like a few years
previously geography maps. This is where I had to fail. I
could no longer put the sounds in my memory, despite a great
finesse of the ear. If my health had been good, my will would have made me
succeed, but I was plagued with intermittent fever. I got up on
morning, macerated in sweat, and I dressed unsteadily. I was suffering
excessively. Not wanting to miss lessons too often, I
poisoned me with antipyrine that had just been made fashionable. I
however, had to ask for time off at all times. When I
was coming back, the others had walked, I stepped back; then they had
eighteen years...

I was also exhausted with revolt. Now I had material life
assured, because André and I, it was forever, he had treated for
my future, and I no longer thought of the future, except seeing myself
actress or singer, - I hoped to overcome the apprehensions
André - And here I was, my kidneys were broken by age and
disease...

In singing I had the same success as in diction. When I had to sing
there was quite a commotion among the students.

--Oldema will sing ...

As I took both lessons, they often came to hear me too
to declamation.

- Let's go to the declamation, Oldéma declaims.

The singing teacher even gave me a little lesson, to
teach singers to pronounce correctly in French.

I loved the atmosphere of the Conservatory so much: this rustling of beehives in
work, of which I was a part, gave me importance to me
which was delicious to me. I especially liked the Wednesday readings,
when, all seated around the table in exquisite intimacy, a
of students read aloud. Often the teacher
was reading, to set the tone. Me, in sight reading, I donged
lamentably, I was impatient to listen to myself ...

One winter, we were reading the _Iliad_: the pupils tasted so little this
reading, that they had tingling in their legs. Marthe
told me:

--If we have to continue this throughout the winter, I will not answer for
I will have nervous attacks.

The professor noticed it.

--I see, ladies, that the desire to educate you
do not torment. From now on we will read, for an hour, Homer, for
those interested, and, for an hour, we will do
more readings at your fingertips.

Homer was too arid for these young girls of eighteen to twenty;
I was ten years older, and I greatly admired the greatness and
life. Especially a night landscape had struck me, full of light and
peace, where the Trojans wait for daylight around the fires and where their
horses graze fresh barley and white oats.

                   * * * * *

As I had not presented myself for the music theory contest, I was
called to the secretary.

--You are thirty, mademoiselle, you should, with your voice and
your artistic sense, be in all your glory. Like your health
did not allow you to study, when you were younger you have
wanted to do it now: it is very meritorious for a person of
your world, which must not live on its work, but it is too late
to create a future for you in the theater; add to that your state of health
current and your repeated leave, and you will understand ...

"Yes, sir, I understand," I said in a strangled voice; but do not
can I attend classes as an auditor? The Conservatory is
become my life.

--I do not advise you, mademoiselle, you would
grief. Go to Holland, come back to your family: this is the
best environment to soak up, and come back after to attend our
concerts.

He squeezed my hand affectionately. I went away; I was suffocating. I myself
took refuge in the declamation room, behind the organ, from where I
raise, like partridges, two singing pupils who were showing their
boobs. One shouted at me:

`` Say, Oldema, you saw nothing!

Soon a young man came to practice on the organ. I was repeating myself in
spasms of despair: Over ... it's all over. This relentless misery
made me miss everything in life, she chased me until he
was too late for everything. She ruined my health, she left me only
this heightened sensitivity, which makes me feel everything, see everything and everything
to fear; because, for a while, I felt that a calamity was going
fall on me here ... I wanted to climb a slope, inaccessible
when the hour has passed. No matter how hard I harness myself, like a beast of
In sum, in this task, I struggled with the obstacles and
difficulties ... too late ... and I still have so many years ahead of me to
regret my missed life ...

I had glimpsed the beauty of an existence of work and art ... finished ...
Here I am more helpless than ever ... And all these beauties to which
I still would have liked to initiate myself and be interested in other than
amateur ... I hate amateur work, and that's all that keeps me
rest...

I had made believe, to explain the shortcomings of my education, that
I had a childhood too nervous, too impressionable, the doctors
had advised not to let me study ... With what deference
the secretary spoke to me: "Someone from your world ... Come home for a
time in your family, miss, this is the best environment for
make you forget the sorrow of your undeserved disappointment ... "

Ah! thin! it's because he believes me of what they call good
family, that he has put on so many gloves ...
greenery or guards, it uses a different language, and it has
other gestures when they come to ask him for seats
theater ... Now he was speaking of undeserved grief, but he would not have
took no account of my struggles and my merit if he had suspected where
I left. So I do not thank him for his kindness.

Another dirty trick that misery played on me: it was showing me the
people in their true light: their respect is only for the position
social and not to the individual, and, when a male is polite to Miss
Oldéma, I would like to be able to put little Keetje in front of him.
rags, to see the about-face of his respect ...

It's over ... I have to leave this Conservatory which has been for me a
admirable school, where I was introduced to French classics, to what
human thought has produced something higher; I learned to understand there and
to feel the most beautiful, the most aristocratically elegant and
claire, how proud I am to speak now, not without fail, alas!
but almost without an accent.

The little I learned from singing and music opened up a world to me
new, full of enchanting visions and sensations; it is me
become clear that music, better than words, expresses joy,
pain, and especially love. I felt, at that moment, the immense value
what did the Conservatory have for me, that it was my guide and
advice ... and, now, finished ... I understand the act of the actor and the
singers singing, but I would have liked to go beyond, and play where
sing it myself, and it's too late ... it's all over hopeless ...

Two singing students came in and were having fun giving the notes
that the young man was playing on the organ. _Do ... if ... D flat ...
la-aaaaaa ..._

He nodded.

What an adorable trill ... Here they are, they are twenty years old, have been here since
their childhood. One is the daughter of a small employee, has a strong, but no
a nice voice; she will get a second prize booster; she will fulminate
a little time against injustices, then marry an employee and there
will think more; and all his years of study will be wasted, because they do not
did not make him take a step ...

The other's voice is very pretty, she will have her first prize and
will sing _Faust_. Gounod is his god ... His _Ave Maria_, peuh ... I
always see, when I hear him sing or grind on a piano
mechanic, a salesman, hair blowing in the wind, clamoring at full
chest voice, under the window of a grisette:

        Oh, my Lisehette ... Oh, my Lisehette.
    I will love you, always hated

Every time this student sang _Mireille_, she got an extinction
of voice ... _To you my soul Iââhââpartiens._ Ugh! ... as if we
shouted like that when you give your soul! ...

And I saw ladies in crinoline, their hair pomaded, a handkerchief in
the hand, who were swooning ... It's strange, I find this music
libidinous ...

... What would have happened here, if ever we had known a piece of
My past? I would have been ignominiously driven out ... Even Marthe,
would she have understood? Only André loves me more ...
André ... Ah! what a breakthrough of light in my life ... and this
delicious understanding is not his only prerogative: he is beautiful,
chiseled, - evidently women find him ugly, - his hands are
wonders, and, when he laughs, his mouth opens so naively and so
frankly, and, when he's in the mood and throws his wick back
with a nod, it looks like a horse rearing up ... It is a
to be unique. I had happiness: if I had not met André, my
brain would not have managed, and I would have always ignored these
wonders.

Not knowing _Esther_!

                O, my sovereign king,
    So here I am, trembling and alone in front of you.

Not knowing _Le Misanthrope _... _Célimène _...

                And this is not the time
    Madam, as we know, to be a prude at twenty.

And _Dorine_:

    And I would see you naked from top to bottom
    That all your skin wouldn't tempt me.

I shudder at the thought of what my life would have been ...

Then, in music ... My taste can already guide me. Have I not unearthed
Beethoven's and Haydn's lieder alone? Is he a lied
more moving than_Ein kleines Haus_ by Haydn and _Geliebt wird alles
ausser mir_ of Beethoven? Didn't I follow myself, with a finger on the piano,
initiated into these marvels of love and sensitivity? ...

So my lot is not that bad yet. I smell and savor
deeply all these works of beauty ... They are also good
actions, because we only have to evoke them during the sad days, and they
act as a sedative ... You can't take everything away from me
that I learned: I own it forever, and it is already a great
treasure ... I will quickly tell André what is happening to me and cry in
his waistcoat, as he says.

And, stiff as if I had been beaten, I came out of my hiding place
behind the organ. I put on my hat and took my lunch box, and the
throat contracted, I was about to leave, when a pupil of the song passed.

--Oldema why didn't you come to singing? You would certainly have had
a lesson today, now that you know how to trill ... You know, your
trill is clear and fresh, so watch the next lesson.

I smiled at him without being able to answer. She walked away, vocalizing:

--_ Love, aaa-love, teach-me the a-aa-art of
fein-in-in-indre, teach me the a-aa-art of-eeee fein-in-in-indre._

And I left.

As I walked along, I could only think again: "I escaped it narrowly." Without
André on my way, what an opaque night would have ended up stretching over
me ... to say that there was a time when looking for a crust of bread
was my only concern ... It was however also an enjoyment
intense to see the little ones eating and warming themselves ...! "




I had spoken so much to André from Amsterdam that he wanted to go.

When the train entered the city, I was seized with a tremor, and
a pallor pinched my face. I hadn't counted on printing
what was going to do to me in this city where I had suffered so much?

André saw my emotion and squeezed my hands.

- You are going to show me everything, it will relieve you.

We got off at the Bible Hotel: my father had driven the omnibus there.

And I saw my father again, in Haarlemmerdyck, perched, smiling, on a
omnibus, leading actors to Haarlem: he had touched me with his
whip for me to screw, and had shouted cheerfully, while I
trottinais next to the car:

--I'm coming back tonight; you must not bring me to eat at noon, they will me
will give whatever it takes.

And he had laughed, putting his horses to a trot.

That's it ... he is going to cross the countryside and then father forgets everything ... He
go along the dike for two hours, with the canal on one side and the
fields on the other; he will joke with the men who haul the boat
water, and say courtesies to the reapers, as if he had them
always known, and, when he smells the hay cut, he will start to
sing.

My father once took me a long stretch with him in the seat,
after asking the actors for permission, and I never had
saw my father so handsome. Her big blue eyes projected joy; he
had taken off his top hat and his chestnut curls were flying in the wind, he
kept calling me 'Poeske', and I had the feeling that we
were both small. At Halfweg, he gave me to a coachman
returning to town.

Just seeing him in his seat, I knew he was going to become again
small, and I was very sorry not to be part of the party.

And in winter ... Ah! well, father does not bother for so little: then,
it is the snow which amuses it and makes it very fresh, although it is beating
feet to be perched up there, in the cold, without a heater, as in
have the other coachmen ...

                   * * * * *

In the evening, on the Dam, I saw that the old Stock Exchange was being demolished, and I
told André one of the episodes of my childhood that had the most
passionate; to make it clearer to him, I first explained to him a
ancient privilege that allowed city children to play in the
large Hall of the Stock Exchange, in summer, on fair days. My father
thus told the origin:

--When Amsterdam was still a wooden city, a little vagabond
had taken refuge, to spend the night there, under the Stock Exchange, in a small
overlooking the "het Damrak" canal. Soon a boat docked near the
refuge where the little vagabond was. The men who occupied it
were discussing among themselves how the enemy could best seize the
town, while she was asleep. They were spies sold to
the enemy of the fatherland.

The little vagabond was dying for fear of being discovered: he was holding back his
breathing and did not dare to move or blow his nose although he had a cold
to sleep outside in all weathers. And the enemies of the fatherland
would certainly have drowned him or worse, perhaps hanged: he kept quiet
without moving a fin.

--But if he had sneezed?

--He deserved death: he was like a soldier before the enemy, and
the slightest fault is then a betrayal. So he was not sneezing, because he
felt his duty.

When the boat, with the rowing spies, had disappeared under the
bridges in the Y, the little vagabond came out of his hiding place, ran to
burgomaster and told him the story. Soon the whole town was
standing; the torches were lighted; the drums beat; the
bourgeois, the people, children, and even a little girl, who
was returning from a party, in a white satin dress embroidered with gold, carrying
belt, hung by the legs, two small white chickens that she
had won the lottery, joined the soldiers, and a
night watch in every nook and cranny of the city, to find out
if there were still spies or if the enemy had already been able to land.

The enemy, in the Y, hearing the bells ringing, the drums beating,
and seeing by the light of torches these terrible archers pass in their
fine silk clothes, he took it for granted and set off on his ships.

--And the little vagabond?

--The burgomaster and the aldermen asked him what reward he
wanted to have saved the city. He replied: "I wish that as soon as
present, and in times to come, the children of Amsterdam would have the
privilege of playing on the Bourse every day of the fair and that they
could make as much noise there as they liked. " This was granted,
and that is why, my children, you can go and play in the big
Hall of the Stock Exchange. "

So my father, when he got home a little early and was not
not too tired, told us one or the other ancient custom
from Amsterdam. He was then smoking his pipe in Gouda clay, holding Hein, his
eldest son, on his knees, and he wanted no other light than that
projected by the hearth.

                   * * * * *

I was ten, Naatje five. We were skipping school on the
Damrak, we inspected the empty barrels in which there had been
syrup and lick the sides with your finger. I live a lot of
women and children, in Sunday dress, head for the Dam.

--Naatje, I'm sure the Stock Exchange opens today ...

We followed them. That was it: they stopped at one of the little doors
of the Stock Exchange. When the door opened we walked up the stairs with them
and we found ourselves in a very large room.

Almost all the children were accompanied and wore toys.
In rows of four or five, they walked one behind the
others, in the side galleries. Some carried on a stick
small glossy mills, red, white and blue, with a pompom
orange. Others were beating tiny drums or spinning
rattles, and were capped with paper bicorns; the girls
showed wooden dolls high on their fists; the boys
were blowing lead trumpets.

Naatje and I, bareheaded, unwashed, in rags and smeared with
syrup, had nothing; we were following the line, trying to talk to the
children or to borrow their rattle to make him do:
"Raaraaraa". I offered to a little girl to carry her doll for a moment,
saying I forgot mine. But none wanted to leave us
touch his toys.

After a few laps, we left the ranks; we didn't say anything anymore
and watched all these boys and girls pass by, beaming with
pleasure to be there to be able to show off their beautiful toys. We do not
did not want to leave yet. Mothers gave their
children's toast and toast; others made them drink, in
small cups, milk that they had brought in
bottles.

Naatje became stubborn and refused to move forward; me, I felt
tired, sad ... Shame now made me pull Naatje by the
arms to leave, but she began to cry and kick her feet. I
managed to take him away, promising him a rattle for Monday
according to.

At the Nieuwendyck, we looked at the toys in the beautiful shops,
but they didn't tell us much: they were railways
enamelled; spinning tops the size of teapots; dolls like
three-year-old children, with real hair, and horribly closing their
eyes; golden table services. No, we couldn't play with that:
one would have damaged for florins and florins, and father did not earn
only three a week ...

At Haarlemmerdyck, we went down to the steps of the cellar
toys ... Ah! there our soul opened: painted wooden dolls,
boxes with beads of all colors, lead trumpets
colored red, rattles, green earthenware table services.

--Ah! Naatje, look then, look then.

Naatje remained mute, like an asshole, stubbornly showing a rattle
and a small paper mill.

In a large box were piled very small dolls of
articulated wood; they cost only two cents. I promised myself a
of these dolls for the following Monday, because I had just taken the
decision to go to the Stock Exchange on the last Monday of the fair, me with
a doll, and Naatje with a rattle ... "I will give him a long
dress: so we will not see that it is so small. "

I had eight days ahead of me ... When my mother sent me to do
commissions and that there was a penny in the change
when they gave me back, I distracted him; or, if I saw one lying around
I took the table or the cupboard. I hid them on a board
inside the large wooden fireplace mantel.

I needed four: two for the rattle, and two for the doll.
I soon had two cents for the doll. I dressed her in a dress
train made of a rag and a cardboard toquet covered with tulle,
from my mother's beanie, with a chicken feather stuck with
side: these hats were called "Tudors". I made curls to
Naatje, I challenged my natural curls with water, and braided my
hair in multiple small braids, for having curled them "to
the English ”.

Monday, with my hair in waves on the back, my white apron that
I had not soiled on Sunday, Naatje her brown hair in curls,
we pretended to go to school; but, once past the lock, I
took out my doll from under my skirts, and we entered the cellar
toys buy the rattle. And off we go to the Stock Exchange ...

Ah! the joy, the pride, the internal thrill that stirred us in
entering the Hall, where this time we were like the others: me,
holding with two fingers and thumb my doll under the skirt, her train
spread out along my hand; Naatje spinning his rattle. We are not
looked more suspiciously, the children let us take their
toys in exchange for ours. Then a woman gave us a half small
corinthian bread, because we were playing with his mustard. What
exquisite feeling of not inspiring disgust, of being on a
equal, and even to be admired, because we admired our hair
to which I had brought all my art.

We stayed until the closing of the Bourse; then we returned
by the Nieuwendyck, each holding the little boy with one hand,
while the mother walked behind us. At the Haarlem Bridge, she
left saying that we were very nice children.

Since that time I always had pennies on my
planchette; but it was not for toys only: it was
also to renew the covers of my school books that he
often had to change. My mom couldn't always give me the
penny that these sheets of paper cost, and, then, the master
pinched my ears and hit me with his ruler on my fingertips
that I had to present to him up.




The next day, early in the morning, we started our hikes in the
city. André was ecstatic over this immense city, entirely built in
seventeenth century.

- I could not tell you the history of its streets and its houses,
but I can tell you how generations of children came together
etiolated in its flooded cellars and its stinking dead ends, how
generations of adults rheumatized there, saw their teeth fall out and
their necks seam, how generations of old people died there
impotent and dropsy. I have lived in almost every part of the
city, and I know the smell of its canals and sewers.

- Come, Keetje, so much beauty must also give happiness. These people
who pass by seem happy and happy.

--Oh! certainly, that we must be able to find happiness there, but, I, I do not
did not know him. Since the morning we entered town by
the Amstel, until the evening we left it, again via the Amstel,
our life has been an almost unbelievable calamity ...
that we will walk, I will show you my old homes and tell you
how we lived there: it will be sad, André ... In Brussels, I have
constantly longing for Amsterdam; I shouldn't have, however
return.

I led him to the Utrechtschedwarsstraat and showed him a cellar,
our first home. Children of all ages played on the little one
steps below the street; it seemed to me that it was us and I myself
recalled how one night, twenty years ago, the water had invaded
our cellar.

                   * * * * *

Hein and I, we were lying on our mattress, on the ground, with two
other children. We were on our stomachs, our faces
buried in the pillow.

"I see the circles," said Hein. They advance and retreat; they
get bigger, then smaller; they are yellow, green and
purples; it looks like there is a lamp behind, so clear ...

'Mine,' I said, 'are red, blue and orange. They become more
wide and take up the whole room; they turn very quickly ... Oh! here
that they change: they are now many, small and of all
color; there are lots of little lights that spin with them. Ah!
how beautiful! how beautiful! ... What do you see now?

Hein no longer answered, he was asleep.

I kept my face in the pillow for a moment longer; but, with the
body and bed heat, fleas began to pester me. I myself
put on my seat.

Our cellar was dark; only, the skylight of the stove and the cover a
little raised projected a few lights. Standing on the table, the
my father's big boots looked like two scarecrows. My brothers and
sisters slept around me; Hein had taken the little dog in his
arms; the cat was curled up against Dirk. The doors of the alcove, where
my parents slept with the baby, were open; reflections of
pan slipped over my mother's face, framed by her
night; she seemed to me so emaciated that I was afraid; but the snoring
noisy sounds of my father gave me confidence.

I went to bed. However, I was agitated, I was shivering: it seemed to me that
the mattress was getting wet.

--Mother! mother!

--What is it?

--I think Dirk peed, the mattress is wet; that to me
burns.

--What do you want me to do? step back and leave me alone.

I went back to bed: I tried to see the luminous circles again, which
distracted during my feverish and sleepless nights, but I didn't
managed more. A great uneasiness seized me. I no longer dared
open my eyes, I heard rustling and rustling under the
furniture. I curled up in terror.

Suddenly the cat leapt onto the table; he and the boots seemed so
disproportionately large that I had the sensation of three beasts
evil ...

The mattress got more and more wet. Scared I knocked around
from me: my hand, which touched the floor, made water spurt out.

--Mother! mother! it is the rising water.

--What, the water?

--Yes, we are in the water!

All the children had started to cry; water, which until now
had only oozed, suddenly invaded us. My father stood up,
and swore hideously because he had put his feet in the water. He
Carried us all into the alcove where we settled down as best we could:
Dirk at my mother's feet, I at my father's; I took one of his
feet in my arms to feel safe, and we fell asleep.

I was awakened by the noise my father made in the morning: my back bent
so as not to bang his head against the beams of the ceiling, he took care of
place wooden blocks and put planks on them to be able to move around
in our cellar, where the water had risen to the top of the plinth.

When we got up, the street was in turmoil, the flood had invaded
all the basements, and, although we were used to it, it was everywhere a
constant back and forth, to see the height of the water and how
had parked.

My mother, very excited, dropped everything: she did not send us to school and
did not make dinner. Mina and I followed her to the cellars, but soon
she sent me home to watch the children.

We played wading in the water. Then Hein tied a string to a
stick, attached a hook made of a hairpin, and, installed
on a chair he fished in the muddy water. Dirk was dragging himself on his
behind along the planks and held, in his blued hands of
cold, a nest with dead mice that the water had chased from below
the wardrobe. Naatje was screaming in his chair.

Dirk again found a half-dead rat, and, still dragging himself the
along the planks, he showed us with joy the beast that breathed
again. But he slipped into the water; I couldn't get it out, it was too much
heavy ... So I went in search of my mother, who was waddling
cellar in cellar, drinking coffee everywhere, and only returned with regret to
pull Dirk out of his position.

He and Hein were starting to shiver. My mother put them to bed; they
rolled into a ball, blue from the fever that invaded them. I started to
cry: the fever tormented me too. My mother laid me down next door
them, covered us with rags, and, all three, pressed together
the other, our teeth clashing, great shivers shook us,
accompanied by swarms, as if ants were roaming our
veins. So we waited for the hot fit, which only declared itself
the afternoon.

We then passed slowly from blue to pink, then to fiery red; we
rejected our blankets; we clapped our arms around us; we
we were backing away from each other and spreading our legs, looking for
freshness, while an intense thirst dried us ... My mother, a
candle in one hand to light up the dark alcove, with the other hand
gave us water to drink, in order to relieve us.

Towards evening the fever left us. We were only three
tattered, and my mother only had a small slice of black bread for us
give to rebuild our strength.

Since then, intermittent fever has tortured us for years.

Our little dog had disappeared; we assumed he had run away ...
A smell of decay, more and more intense day by day, invaded the
cellar; my parents believed that dead rats must be in
either corner. When the water was gone, they began to search
and discovered, drowned under the alcove, the rotting dog.




`` You bring up those scenes, Keetje, as if you were still there.

--I am not for nothing a deranged: I relived all this every
day of my life. All our pretty children have withered away in this lair,
during the three years that we lived there, as withered away
again those.

We went to lunch at the Rokin, in one of the biggest restaurants.

Great God, what a monstrosity in these antitheses! ... I was ashamed
to eat these refined dishes and drink these choice wines, because André
knew how to choose; me, I have always remained incompetent to compose a
menu.

He made me understand the ineptitude of this feeling.

--My father worked fifty years to earn a few hundred
a thousand francs; of a modest fortune thus acquired, one can enjoy. Life
is not made only from a crust of bread, and it is not because
I buy from time to time a small study of painting or that I eat
a lobster, - it is excellent, this crustacean, we would eat it just for
color is like absorbing joy and
light - which most of humanity does not have. No, these
questions are more complex than that ... It is by struggling, by doing
touching the iniquities that will be achieved. With some comrades
and several sociologists friends, we are going to found a group
avant-garde, which will deal with social issues, the education of
people. We will found a journal ... I will give a large place to
art. My mother says that will make me a dancer, but I don't
do not consider it that way; she sees only a way to get away from the
women.

`` But then, if she ever knows, she's going to undermine me ...

--Well, I'll tell him you're part of my life.

And his adorable gaze searched mine, to embed the
confidence I had to have: I felt ready to pay glances
similar to any torture, for I had a presentiment that when
his mother would know, our happiness would be damaged.

Before returning to the hotel to rest, I again led André in
an alley in Nieuwendyck and I showed him a dead end from which a
foul odor. A woman at the entrance was soliciting; she was looking at us
amazed, but must have taken me for a lady of charity, as I was
still happened probably because of my sober dress and my headbands
under the small hood. I pointed out to André the first one
house on the right: the woman stood aside, thinking that we were going
come in ... Oh! that stench! ... What a reminiscence!

                   * * * * *

I was then twelve years old. Intermittent fever had me so
devastated that the doctor, running out of quinine, declared that the change
only air could save me. My parents decided that I would go pass
a few days in Haarlem, with one of my aunts; it was judged that I was
large enough to travel alone.

We chose, for the departure, the day when I should not have the
fever. My mother washed my clothes, she gave me some "dubbeltjes",
and I went to take the boat of water out of the gate of Haarlem.

The boat was hauled by two men. It was still very cold,
although the cows were already in the meadows and the sheep,
with their sheep, they played there while frolicking. I went down to the cabin
and I was amused to see, through the windows, the water splashing up to
of my face.

In Haarlem, my big cousin, who stuttered a little, was waiting for me and
immediately gave me good news; he would take me the same evening
in Hillegom, where he was hired to pick flowers.

- You never see flowers, do you? ... Well, you will be able to
satiate you.

--Oh! yes, I see flowers on the Haute-Digue, in the grass.

--Ah! these flowers don't look like the ones I'm going to
to show...

The aunt received me very well. We had dinner of potatoes and rice
boiled together, with which she had mixed a plate of fat;
it was hot and good. Moreover, my aunt had, in the family, the
reputation for "being on its beak" and doing good food at all costs.
I thought it was his way of preparing that was good:
the same potatoes, boiled by my aunt, were like
egg yolks, and, with us, like soap.

Towards evening, a cart drawn by two dogs, led by a
peasant, came to take us. My cousin sat me down in the middle of the baskets
empty, surrounded me with sacks, and we left.

The weather had warmed up. It was soon dark, the way seemed long to me
in the dark, but from time to time I got puffs of
perfumes so delicious, that I stuck my head out from under the bags, and,
opening my mouth wide, I greedily sucked in this air that
filled with ease and well-being. Soon I started to sing
psalms and school lieder.

--Hey! Hey! little cousin, you wake up, you are no longer sick.

`` Sing again, sister, '' said the man, `` sing again ...

I screamed, overflowing with joy.

In the village, the cart took paths, crossed small bridges,
went right, left, then left again, and stopped in front of a
little house. My cousin made me jump to the ground and we entered.

The room he introduced me to was painted Delft blue; mats
covered the floor; in the middle, a large yellow sailcloth,
orange edge. On the table, against the window, supper was served:
toast with Edam cheese and coffee. A peasant woman in a tulle cap
white with raised wings, and multiple petticoats, wearing mules, we
received.

--Ah! it is the sick sister ... well, she can be seen: we do not
doesn't look like she has fevers ...

--The perfume galvanized her: she sang, along the road, like a
nightingale.

- Come on, sister, eat and drink, and then sleep ...

I was very pleasantly surprised to be treated with this kindness.

"And where are you going to put the sister to sleep?" the man asked.

--She will sleep well with me, replied my cousin, you must not
disturb: I know you don't have a bed.

The cousin and I climbed the ladder to the attic, where
fresh straw was spread, and, after having made me take off my shoes
and my outer clothes, he covered me well with the one blanket.
So he blew out the candle, took off his jacket and shoes, and
lay down.

I had never been so happy as since this morning. I saw the
moon and stars through the roof window; the perfume entered through the
cracks; I felt such a feeling of gratitude that I would have
wanted to do a good deed, and I, who never prayed, began to
knees and I recited in a fervent voice: "Our Father who art in
heavens ”and“ Hail, Mary, full of graces ”; then I inhaled it
perfume that almost made me wander.

So I reflected that Keesje and Klaasje were at our dead end,
near the sewer and next to the barrel that served as a pierced chair ...
then that I will have a fever tomorrow and that I will not be able to go see
the flowers ... and I started to cry. My cousin woke up and me
asked:

- What is the matter, sister?

I tell him.

--Oh! sister, he stammered, you will see them the flowers: I will carry you,
surrounded by the blanket, along the fields.

He hugged me, and we fell asleep.

When I woke up the next day, my cousin was gone. There was
water in a small basin, a towel and a comb next to it; I myself
washed as carefully as I could, and went downstairs.

The peasant woman was alone: ​​she made me lunch. My cousin came in for his
second breakfast, then he took me away.

As I walked around the house, it was a dazzle. I started to run in
calling out:

--Dandelions! dandelions! ...

My cousin and the peasant were writhing. Arrived near the flowers, I live
that they weren't dandelions.

--These are daffodils, sister.

--But there are so many! so much! I cried; a whole field and again and
again ..., I said, turning around.

But I stopped, as if seized with vertigo.

--And there! And there!

In front of me stretched a field of blue-violet flowers, from which emerged
the scent that had intoxicated me since the day before; next to it, another huge square
with the same flowers, but pink, then another lilac, then others
white and more flesh-colored and crimson-colored fields ...

I ran through the gutters, overwhelmed with admiration.

Suddenly I stopped: a field of tawny red tulips unfolded
in front of me as far as the eye can see, a second of variegated red tulips and
yellow, there white edged with red currant, and, to the right and to the
left, and in front and behind, everywhere fields of tulips,
hyacinths and daffodils ...

The peasant had followed me, quite amused by my joy; I threw myself into his
arm sobbing.

--I don't want the fever, because then I won't be able to see the
flowers.

"La, la, sisterette, you won't have a fever."

It was already ten o'clock, and the fever was not rising.

My cousin and the man took care of cleaning the hyacinth squares:
they removed many florets from the cones, because they
choked each other, and threw them in a heap.

Ah! how beautiful it was! a whole large pile of blue flowers,
almost black, then a heap of reds, and more mauve heaps, and
other heaps and still others ...

My mother told us that, in her country of Liège, we stripped
flowers on the way to the procession, to honor the
Virgin. "If they had a few wheelbarrows of these loose flowers
their stems, what a wonderful fragrant path they could make to
mother of God"...

I wanted to help my cousin, but the smell was so penetrating that
I became quite pale.

- Leave that, sister, take only the good.

The fever did not come: on returning at noon, the peasant woman cried out
my pretty face.

The enchantment lasted four days. One early morning, the peasant loaded his
dog cart of baskets of tulips, hyacinths and daffodils
for the city market. He sat me down on sacks between the baskets,
and we set off for Haarlem.

On arrival, he took out a bouquet of a few tulips from one of the baskets,
that I had especially admired.

`` There you are, sister, for you ...

They were three huge double flowers, variegated purple-purple and
white: they had imposed on me, I found them severe; is the
named the "Winner"; then three ivory white, veined with mauve pink,
that we called "Bridal veil".

My aunt led me directly to the water boat and I came to
Amsterdam before noon. When I disembarked, I had the feeling of leaving
behind me a treasure, which had belonged to me for a moment and that
delighted forever. What was Sleeping Beauty's castle,
what was Cinderella's crew by those purple, red fields,
lilac, gold and vermeil! ... We did not speak of perfume in these tales.
Was there happiness without perfume? Since I had been imbued with
this aroma, that night and day I had been escorted by it in all my facts
and gestures, I wanted him ardently, I gasped after him, and I
was saying that without him, I would no longer love anything ... Ah! i was going
however to see Keesje and Klaasje again and be able to put
Naatje, and tell them about the phantasmagoria I experienced four
days.

"The winner! the Winner! ... And would Dirk still have his tooth which
ballotte ... Bridal veil ... you see, Naatje, it is the veil of
bride ... I will carry my bouquet in front of me, so that they can see it all
immediately ... Tomorrow is Sunday, we will have to pay the rent ... "

I hastened my pace on the Haarlemmerdyck, to be near them more quickly.
When I entered our dead end, carrying my bouquet with outstretched arms
in front of me, the stench of the sewer cut my breath away; by entering
at home, the smell of the little barrel almost suffocated me ...
ran towards me, but I pushed them aside, saying:

--Mother, that stench! ...

I came out in the dead end, then came back as though hunted.

--Mother! mother! that stench ...

--But you're crazy, it's like always.

The little ones had thrown themselves on my flowers; they shredded them,
screaming and fighting for their possession.

I soon felt goosebumps covering me; tingling,
precursors of fever, ran through me. Soon I was in bed,
rolled into a ball in the alcove, chin against knees, my
jaws clashing from the fever that had taken hold of me.




We had brought coffee to our room. André smoked,
walking up and down.

--We wonder how human beings, in full growth,
resist such treatments. Looks like society applies
to make degenerates and scoundrels.

Without saying anything to each other, we went to supper in a milk room; then
we wandered through the canals of the center.

In the evening, the Oudezydsachterburgwal, a narrow canal with cramped quays, is
invaded by a thick night. The tall, rickety and shrunken houses do not
are not illuminated: one guesses them however polished like the palates.
From the wooden bridges we can see the twisted trees, which meet
almost, above the sticky water on which the filth
float softly. A smell of stagnant rot makes you hold back
breath.

Near the bridges, isolated women, bare heads, in wide aprons
clear, stare at the men with a busy gaze. On a bridge,
kids and a pubescent girl chase each other greedily. At
beyond, at the corner of an alley, one of the kids bursts into the small
candy shop, ringing loudly the doorbell of the
door; he buys sugar droppings and, joining the girl, he
made choose in the cone.

On the quays, the street lamps spaced out, buried in the branches,
rather project their glow on the water, where everything shimmers in
flickering streamers.

But here is a window from which emerges like an orange mist ... Two
women are leaning a little out of the raised guillotine. Behind
them, the room is enveloped in a soft light one of the
orange and red shade and plain and diaphanous curtains. The back and the
croup of one of the women receive a coppery reflection. His Jewish figure, to
the high hairstyle is outside the window, in the shade. The other is very
young, very blond, soft-fleshed, all in white; chin resting on
with both hands, she invites passers-by with her clear eyes. Like us
let's go back a second time, in our aroused curiosity, the blonde woman
looks at me defiantly. The other doesn't care about me, but invites André
with an imperceptible gesture of the finger.

Three or four houses are lit like this, with this yellow light,
red and orange, on the chiaroscuro channel.

We continued to stroll. We took a bridge, then a street, and we
We walked along the oldest and most honestly intimate quay
from Amsterdam.

All of a sudden, I stayed where I was. Across the canal, around the corner
from an alley, people carrying parcels entered and left a
vast illuminated building: the large Mont-de-Piété of the city, founded in
1614.

--Andre, look; this is the first establishment my mother learned to
know the way, by asking passers-by, the day after our
arrival in Amsterdam. She took me with her, to be able to take me there
send alone in the suite, and I have been there often. Ah! the Mont-de-Piété
was our great refuge ... the neighbors even lent us objects
to engage them; everything is accepted there; irons, boots,
ice creams, frames, everything finally ... And there you go, it continues ... Look
this heavy door that falls on those who enter and leave with
their poor packages: it was too heavy for me, and a passerby
always helped me to push her ... She falls and falls ... Men
slip the pledge money into their pants pocket and hold the
hand over it; women lift their skirt and put it in a pocket
good wife.

Here is a man who waits, he probably has no job. His allure
is neat. It's Saturday night, the day the man pays her in his pocket
goes out with his wife to shop for the week. He has
used to offer him a cup of chocolate in a milk salon,
and, while he goes to take a drop, she will wait at the door:
women of this class do not go into cabarets. As he did
not his pay, they brought something to the nail to be able to do the
shopping anyway. The children, whom the elder keeps at home,
wait to have their share of bream herrings or smoked eels
that we buy that day.

"I only have to look at their silhouette to know their customs: here, the
mores of proletarians change with the neighborhood, because they are the majority
time, from father to son, from a neighborhood, and this gives them a
special character.

We went back to bed. We had two beds; but André,
overwhelmed by everything I had told him, came into mine and
held a good part of the night in his arms. But I couldn't sleep
the Mount of Piety haunted me ... I saw my mother again ... her golds, her
coat, shawl ...

                   * * * * *

Every year in the spring, my mother became sad and worried. It was
when it was necessary to renew, at Mont-de-Piété, the recognitions of
"His golds", his coat and his shawl, engaged in his hometown
since the early years of her marriage.

When she didn't have the money, she borrowed it, or made us
fasting, or wore our clothes to the nail; but the money for these
renewals, she needed it, and, all feverish, she gave us
described her earrings and brooch for the hundredth time.

--At the hooks, there is a small heart; the pendants, on a background of
filigree, first have three small streamers in shiny gold, then a
clover leaf with three nail heads around it, and, finally, five
rays forming half a star. The brooch is in filigree zigzags, with
a large leaf in the middle, surrounded by nail heads and combs that
spread out, and three little hearts as pendants. When I was young
girl, I saved for years to have them, and, as I
could not complete the sum, I went to the jeweler, and
I suggested that she add a lace collar and handkerchief; he
accepted ...

»My coarse brown coat has three collars, and the shawl in
white cashmere has pink and green arabesques: it is a half-shawl,
but that is not seen when you wear it.

»They have been at Mont-de-Piété for twenty years: God knows if I
will never see again! ”

And big tears rolled down her pretty face.

--Finally I renewed once again: we will not be able to sell them within one
year.

Ever since we children were born we had heard these
complaints every spring. For my part, when I dreamed of myself
Fleur-de-Marie, recognized by Prince Rudolf, it was always adorned
jewelry and my mother's shawl ...

                   * * * * *

Mina, who had gone wrong, came home one evening with her head on fire, her eyes
shining, and the whole face blooming with joy and surprise. In
approaching the table, she saw the design of the golds, which once
the more my mother had traced us.

`` Did you still spend the evening getting drunk on this? ...

And looking at my mother, her face took on an expression of pity, as I
thought she was incapable of having any. She went to her, whispered to her
something in her ear, and handed her a paper which she held tightly
in his hand. My mother covered Mina with kisses.

We spent three days in feverish anticipation. So the packages
arrived.

My mother couldn't untie the string; we cut it, and,
in the yellow wadding, the golds appeared ... My mother took them from the ends of
fingers, felt them, turned them over; his eyes flashed hastily;
then, raising the golds, she showed them to us.

Ah! the horrors! ... of frightful pendants ten centimeters long; the
brooch, as big as the palm of your hand; filigree all blackened, hence
The red gold designs stood out, thin as a peel. Alone,
the women of the fairgrounds carried these monstrosities ...

--But how ugly! I exclaimed; and the coat, let's see!

We undid the package.

A heavy garment of coarse material, with three superimposed pilgrims, in
went out ... He passed from hand to hand and all of us, the young
couldn't find enough terms to denigrate him.

And the shawl! ... a poor rag, like the beggar in the church in
had one, tied around his waist.

My father, in shirt sleeves, his arms crossed, let his
eyes from us to our mother: she was quite confused and was handling her
objects with deference.

--Cato, let them say, your gold is very beautiful; they are also beautiful
back when you bought them and wore them on Sundays for
take a walk ... There were not two like you in the whole town,
Cato, when you wore your sky blue dress over your crinoline, your shawl
white with Persian designs, and your Brabant bonnet in lace and flowers
white on your wavy brown headbands ... We could only see the end of
your ears with the pendants that brushed against your shoulders ... you were
so pretty, Cato, that when you went out, no policeman's wife
was visible, they were all hiding, out of jealousy ...
pendants, Cato, and your shawl, that I can see you again ...

- No, no, she said, timidly: tomorrow I'll be dressed.

- No, Cato, put them on: I want to see you again pretty, as you were then.

With her agitated fingers, she hooked the curls, wrapped herself in the shawl,
attached the brooch and landed in front of my father.

He looked at her: his face contracted in a hideous grimace, so as not to
not laugh; but it was stronger than him, he burst into a tense laugh ...
then he took my mother by her arms, sat her down on her knees and, to them
two, they cried.

Were they grotesque enough, these two old people! ... That was it, the beautiful
things of their young days, about which we had entertained our evenings without
bread and without light. These ridiculous objects, that's what made them
joy and pride! Attifed thus, they had been able to believe themselves beautiful and
love each other! Ah! no! As our times were more chic, more convenient, and
how much better! ... there was not even a kerosene lamp, nor
washing boards; it was necessary to light up with a lamp
brat, who had given my mother her eye blinks, and
scratch the fingers while washing your hand ... And that's because this
time no longer exists that they cry ...

Then those people with white hair and wrinkles, had they even been
young? ... They say that I look like my mother: he is not, however,
possible that she had a face like me and that I would come to me
like his ...

Mina and I looked at each other; our shrugs
agreed in finding them grotesque: "besides, do old people
should cry and kiss like this? ... "

Mina's gazes were hard, mine must be too; But
all the little ones cried around the parents.




The next day, while getting dressed, André said to me:

--Keetje, now that you have disgorged yourself, let's go to the Museum: I can't wait to
see the Rembrandts and the Pieter de Hooghs.

We spent the day at the Museum. The Pieter de Hoogh especially
attracted me. No one as much as he has made dignity calm, conscious
and sure of oneself, of figures and things; its warm colors and
Dorées literally made our mouths water. The Terburgs again
reminded me of some kind and distant ladies with whom, little
girl, I was going to get the alms of the week. But the woman in blue
by Vermeer from Delft ... André would come back to it every moment and shoot
around, like a cat around a bowl of milk. Rembrandt escaped me this
that day, but the next day, at the Van der Hoop Museum, I live through a door
ajar a painting placed on the ground against the wall.

--André, come, there is, I think, something very beautiful.

We looked through the crack.

--Oh! yes ... if we dared ...

I pushed the door just enough to slide us in, and here we are
in front of the wonder ... I was not mistaken; I had this thrill
that gives me the pinnacle of art, where my whole being leaps, where my
instinct is grappling with the absolute and no longer fool me. It was the
fragment of the _Anatomy Lesson of Dr Deymann_, by Rembrandt: the
corpse emptied painted in foreshortening.

André could only say:

--These feet ... these feet ...

We were as if jealous of our discovery, and, after
satiated for a long time, we also slipped furtively by the
door, which I closed on us as on a sanctuary that was not necessary
not to be desecrated. It was not until long after that this painting
restored has been exhibited in the public rooms of the Museum.

Now artistic enthusiasm has taken hold of us, and we do not
more than beauty: the streets, the houses, the canals, everything was
material with an artistic sensation: the large canals, above all which encircle
city...

We took the Canal des Seigneurs, by the Amstel, on the shadow side.
Ah! the rest, the appeasement that penetrated me ... The trees with foliage
dark and cool, leaning and repeating in thick water; the
large, quiet houses, without moldings or relief, ox blood color
coagulated, the frames of the high windows painted yellow, the
mauve checks veiled with sober plain curtains; the old doors
sculpted, shining, with a paint greasy and icy like a mirror;
the ups and downs of granite steps, with fences and chains
forged; and the "Naatje", in a white cap and apron, gave us the
feeling of a full life, but with measured steps.

Two spots, however, on these wonderful houses: two windows of one
ground floor, lined with bins filled with pink geraniums!

--It must be a bitch, exclaimed André, who wanted to "brighten up this old man.
bazaar ... "Here, madame, he grumbled, the very flowers are out of place:
maybe pansies, or crimson crimps, but nothing beats
better...

We continued our stroll on the brick pavement, where the step is
amortized: no cars, occasionally an old crew, drives
by stiff lackeys, cockade in hat.

On the other side of the canal, the sun ocher the facades and the trees, and
in the water still everything was reflected, blurred, in a light
Shivers.

--Say, if we had friends in Amsterdam, on the Canal des Seigneurs,
who would invite us to spend a month of summer with them, and also
in winter when it snows and we skate in front of their door ...

Our strolls led us to the _Oude Waal_ and the _Binnenkant_.
From a bridge, one embraces the canals in a quarter of a circle, with
the old tower that once bathed the sea, the old donkey bridges.
The less grandiose but also mysterious houses, leaning forward,
back or side, have an intimate charm. Benches flank the
steps: family life is prolonged there. Men in sleeves
shirt watch with love the canary which screams in its cage,
hung in the sun by the window. A huge fuchsia in a bin,
red and purple bells, invades an entire small staircase in
below the street: a very old woman, with a pale complexion, in a camisole
lilac and white piped cap, looks after him with anxious tenderness.

`` Here, '' said André, `` as on the great canals, life flows in a
groove: how far from us ...

- It's true, this fuchsia is cared for on a fixed day, Sunday afternoon;
winter in the back cellar, summer on the small porch.

--The old woman has pruned it into a cone, and not one flower sticks out the other. AT
see the trunk short and as big as the arm, it must be as old as the
women...

                   * * * * *

On Sunday morning, I drove André to the Jewish quarter.

Bric-a-brac merchants, old clothes merchants,
cigar merchants, hawkers who shout at the top of their lungs: "Buy
so ... a dubbeltje only ... it's all merchandise
stolen! ... »They swarm, piled up, compressed, spending a
incredible intelligence and ability to earn a few pennies.

The vendor of pickles and cucumbers salted or vinegar sings a
chant, plunging his arms up to his elbows in a barrel of
brine. He takes out the yellow and overripe cucumbers, which he chops
cut into pieces. He blows his nose, but, bah! ... your itch
must look like my itch ...

Another sells herring in small slices for two cents a
slice, then more pieces of roast horse. The consumer
prick on a rusty fork, dip them in a jar of mustard
pepper and vinegar, put them in the mouth, and pass the fork to a
other. Thereupon, a few onions and wedges of cucumber eaten
right in your hands, while the brine drips on the floor. And for
ten cents, we treated ourselves to a tasteful snack ...

On the steps, at the bottom of the steep stairs, where a
cable leaving hands clinging to it, old Jewish women
are seated on the steps or even on the stones of the porch. They have
puffy flesh, oozing eyes, interstices in the skin
soiled, hair hidden by a strip of black cloth with a thread
white in the middle simulating the line. The white beanie wraps around
their faces with toothless, slippery mouths, baring gums
scurvy. The dull gaze wanders, insensitive.

André was very moved:

- So see their flabby hands ... how heavy they are
abandoned in the bosom ... We can guess poor beings who have lived a
long existence in these slums without air, without light, above
these canals-cloaks, fed on the most base food, the most
unhealthy ... They are stigmatized by an exhausting life of
low-income ... They are undoubtedly discarded by young people!
so they descend their steep staircase on Sunday morning, and
sit down to enjoy a ray of sunshine and see the bustling life of
their race is scrambling around them.

--It's exactly as you say, except for the discarding: the Jew
is very respectful of his old parents.

The children play on the steps or in the cellars, in the middle of
refuse. Little girls with big black eyes and brown curls
or with thick plaits, a hooked nose, a pale yellow complexion, in
pink aprons or faded little red dresses; the largest, at
the expression of little women, carry or drag the kids. The
boys, curly hair, eyebrows meeting, flapping
drums or crack whips. All scream, squeal in jargon
unintelligible to the uninitiated; - but, I understand, and for
cause ... I sold my pots exactly like them, my cart
row there along the street; - they eat corinthian couques,
suck on barley sugars, or feast on "vinegar".

"The sun is getting thin here," continued André. He slips into a
stairwell, in a cellar, touches the window of a second floor,
but do not fall frankly to heat them once, and it does
not gild these Oriental types: the colors remain chalky and
washed out. Nothing warm emerges from this Orient with pustules,
foul breath, exhalaiso ns of wounds and latrines ...
squeeze your heart ... that they must have suffered to come to this
pale, bluish, swollen and scrubby degeneration, and what spring
must have had this breed to have remained so hardworking and alive at
excess ...

                   * * * * *

The next day we returned to Brussels. When our cab got on the
Along the Botanical Garden, I felt so happy that I cried out:

--André, I wouldn't want to live there anymore. Brussels is more cheerful, and
there is something good-natured about these big Brabant faces,
more generous which gives me confidence ...

In the evening, we went for a walk around the Grand'Place, to
regain possession of the city. Ah! how happy I was ...




André had always spoken to me of his mother as a woman of high
culture and great charity. One winter afternoon, that we
were late in the country, he wanted to dine with me at the restaurant.

--But I must go home to warn my mother and cause a
moment with her: she complains that I leave her too alone ...
Wait for me in the tramway bar, it's hot there.

After half an hour, André had not returned, and some men
were starting to revolve around me. I walked away and slowly walked along
the sidewalk of his street, when I saw a man, walking in front of me,
beat the air with his arms and fall full length in the snow. I
ran to him and leaned over to help him, but I didn't have enough
strength and I was alone in the steep street. Two servants
came out of a house, I called them. They lifted the man up.

--What are we going to do? There is no pharmacy in the vicinity.

"Ring the bell at this door," I said, pointing to André's house; we you
will help.

They rang. The maid opened the door. The man was coming to himself.

--What's the matter? I asked.

--Hunger.

The maid ran to the dining room. A fat lady, red
face and gray-haired, came out calmly, went towards the stairs
basements, and cried in a shrill, quiet voice, with a loud
Walloon accent:

--Philomene, bring up a plate of soup: a man has fallen from
hungry in the street, and we carry it here. Here's an idea...
she growled.

Then she also calmly returned to the room.

The maid came running up with a plate of soup, she was distraught:

- Poor man, go. Poor man! ...

André came. He felt the man's pulse, gave him some money and
asked for his address. The man left, his neck tucked into his shoulders.
The door closed, and I resumed walking the street while waiting
that André could free himself.

I had imagined her mother, tall and thin, dressed in black and
violet, speaking in a deep voice, and the accent as pure as her son ...
“That, a lady of high culture! and charitable! ... We don't have a voice
as tasteless when you have a high culture, nor a back as
unpleasant when you are charitable, and you walk faster, and you
come and see, and, if you are afraid of catching a cold, you at least leave the
bedroom door open for news ... nothing at all
that ... ”She looked sloppy, and the heels of her shoes
were too tight for an old lady. “I couldn't like it.
I'm glad I don't know her, because I couldn't hide
the antipathy that it inspires in me, and André who does not see it that way ...
would hurt him and cause him great pain. "

André joined me.

- Go and see tomorrow for this man.

- I will go ... I must apologize for ringing your doorbell, I did not know
where to contact me.

--But you did well.

"Was that your mother, that cool gray old lady?"

--Yes.

--She did not come to the door for this unfortunate.

He didn't answer.

Our dinner was not filled with talks, as usual. I was thinking
continually looking like that sated old lady, and wondering
how this backyard fowl could have given birth to the
a purebred creature that was his son.

                   * * * * *

André's father, who was an engineer, traveled a lot. I felt
always in André's language when his father was at home: so he
banged on the women with a vengeance.

`` It's obvious, '' I said to him one day, `` that your parents are undermining me.

--They do not know our connection, but they suspect it.

--Well, tell them that they can be quiet, that I will
never do anything stupid, not even marry me. I am too much
happy now that you think you owe me nothing and believe yourself
free...

- Believe me free ... but I am, free ...

--Yes, even to torture me ... When I'm gay, I don't think he
there are people who suffer; if i'm sad i'm unhappy
and ungrateful to fate; you forget that the fate was much nicer
for you ... As for loving, I certainly love more than you, but you
embarrass me in my expansions, with your theories.

- Come on, you're right, I'm absurd ... I'm going to talk to my mother.

That same evening, he came to tell me that his mother was inviting me to lunch for the
next day.

--I told him that, since they did not admit marriage, I had
entered into a free union for several years; that, if I don't
had not spoken, it is because I knew their prejudices against
woman, but that there was nothing to do, that you were my companion for
life, which I thought owed us not to ignore you.
She replied that since there was nothing to do, she
bowed, but it was best not to tell my father about it yet.

--My God, André, with their prejudices ... then, if I were not going to him
to please ... now no one cares for us.

- There you are, never happy ... my father is right, you are all
impossible.

- But I didn't ask you anything.

I was in no rush to meet his mother at all. Her
the silhouette of a stubborn and dry bourgeois had stuck in my eyes,
and I was afraid that she would have consented to receive me only to seek
my defects and indicate them to André ... and above all she had to believe me
do a great honor ... "She will look at me as a person who has
the habit of walking on her head ... she will look forward to the
blunder, but she will be indulgent ... "

In the morning, I had an anxiety and an internal vibration that
made me hug my chest with a deep sigh at all times. I
dressed as usual in a very sober blue cotton dress, with
little blue straw hood trimmed with velvet puffs, and
Sweden. I took the tram and, just in front of the rue d'André, a young
man, jumping before the stop, was thrown against the lamppost and thrown back
under the car. The horses stopped, we took him out and carried him away,
covered in mud and blood. I staggered up the street and rang the bell
at André's, half-fainted. Entering the living room, I started to tremble
and cry.

--A young man fell under the tram, I gasped, a young man
like André.

- Calm down ... Did you know this young man?

- No ... We took it away, full of mud and blood.

--I thought you knew him, to be so emotional ...
do not put yourself in similar states for strangers.

André entered.

--What is it?

--Mademoiselle is in the state of having seen a young man fall under
the tram. You don't have to be so impressionable, let's see ...
lunch, it will give you ...

My God! this clear and cold voice ... and this accent does not leave her
never ... And André who has the most engaging, warmest and
aristocratic that I know ... from whom does he get it? ... because his more
great charm is his voice and what he puts into it.

--That's luck. Put yourself, you don't like them
ceremonies, right?

As I did not answer, she repeated:

- You don't like ceremonies, do you?

"It's up to you," I said.

The fortune of the pot was: large prawns that we ate with
delicious, heavily buttered little sandwiches; salmon sauce
Hollandaise and new potatoes; a mushroom crust
and a chicken with salad; a cream cheese, then a heap
of cupcakes. Three wines, from Marco Bruner, from Pontet-Canet, and one
Burgundy almost orange, he was so old. Coffee was served in
First Empire cups, white with gold flowers. Tablecloths and
towels, as well as crockery, were very common: I do not
I didn't understand ... We hardly talked, we were all stilted. Her
mother and I were suspicious of each other.

Driving me back, André told me that he had bought, in a sale,
this old service and the few antique pieces of furniture that adorned their
House.

--My mother is not sensitive to beautiful things.

--But good to the maids ... what an exquisite lunch, and what cordon bleu you
must have ... we have never had dinner like this in the restaurant.
Why does she say "to pot luck"?

--My mother loves the table: we eat like this every day, it's a
habit of our Walloon country.

--Fichtre, I understand that you never want to have lunch with me;
I, who have hardly left my cabbages and a piece of meat ...

André said to me in the evening:

--My mother does not want to believe that you are always so simple,
she is convinced that you have made an appropriate toilet: then
she has the feeling that you don't like her.

--Finally, she already thought that I played the comedy of simplicity,
to make it look like I wouldn't ruin you.

--However, she believes that you attach great importance to
beauty, and your almond nails amazed her. I told him that the tub
played a big part in your life.

"And she didn't answer you with the de Goncourt's reflection?"

- If ... How do you know that?

--Because it is from the same period, and this generation did not
never used to large waters. It is a pity that I do not have
of bathroom: that would be, I assure you, the room that I would occupy
most. What a strange mentality our parents' generation had ...
believe that the habit of tubing may have given women a tendency to
undress too easily!

--My mother says that she used to swim in a shirt at boarding school.

`` But to wipe herself off, she had to take it off ...
Finally, your mother cited this reflection of the de Goncourt when he
it was about me - She fell well: I do not know the body of
Naatje nor she mine ... I do not like shamelessness, but that
would you say if i always stayed covered in some way?

--Ah! Damn! no! I like your flexible frame too much.

--You do not say: your flesh ... the fact is that I must not have ten
kilos all over the body. I eat soup to gain weight, but this
do not take.

--Get fat ... that would be a shame. Besides, there is no danger, a
bundle of nerves like you! Finally, my mother and you, you do not
Never interlock, I can tell.

And it was true, we never fit together. The parents
André did not beat women in this way except to keep their son for
them or give him a woman of their choice. His mother received young people
girls of accomplished ugliness and colorless to perfection.




Now that I no longer had the attraction and the work of the Conservatory,
I spent long afternoons in my armchair, thinking. I was
become almost foreign to my family: our paths had been so
different...

Naatje never understood why, now that I had
money, my life was not a long party, and why I
"Was not having fun". Having fun was, for her, gang outings,
walks in town, with a delicious snack, the little ones
theaters, and small company balls. As André no longer wanted
that she lived, so to speak, with me, I had to tell her, and,
when I told her about a job, she told me straight out that I didn't have
not to worry about her future, that she would do very well without
me...

I could no longer, on days of anguish and nostalgia, soak myself
close to them, to handle them, to eat them and to love them completely. I had
André: our love had remained, after years, standing and whole; we
we longed like in the early days, and our souls matched
better: my studies had brought me closer to him. But he didn't have
suffered from the things that had tortured me. He claimed, not having
never had physical pain, that it was a question of will.
When my stomach was gripped by unspeakable suffering, he would come
read me Victor Hugo to make me forget them. As these readings me
were almost having nervous breakdowns, he said I had no
brain, that intellectuals conquered pain with thought,
that I only knew how to moan. "We are in pain, but we do not bother
others… ”And he left, furious.

I worshiped him on my knees and only knew how to make my condition worse by fidgeting.
I sent the maid home, carry a tearful letter where I swore
that henceforth I would conquer my illness and no longer bore it with my
miseries. So he would come running calling himself a brute; but it was more
Stronger than him, the suffering woman annoyed him.

Then what did he have, André? his ideas were no longer renewed; he repeated
often, with the same words, what we had discussed about
hundreds of times; I still had the very fleeting sensation of a stop
in his intelligence. And what a strange step ... One would have said that his
legs were getting stiff. Then anger for no reason, and the moment
according to him, he spoke as if nothing had happened.

I kept chewing all this in my long solitudes, because I could not see
literally no one but him. Marthe lived in Paris and did not write to me
more: since she was from the "big city", I had become too
"Firefighter" for her ...

Marthe was a friend of the Conservatory, the only one with whom I was
was bound. The first time I saw her I was literally stunned
of her attractive beauty: I who had always gone for freshness
body and soul, I was under the spell of this one creature
slightly ghastly. Tall and slender, with a wavy gait, like a palm tree
who swings; huge black eyes, naive mouth, nostrils that
vibrated when she spoke, her complexion blurred and an expression
enthusiastic who made her whole being flourish; feet and
fine and impeccable hands, the voice a little veiled. I did not dare
hardly present her to André, her disturbing beauty
worried me, but I was also proud to show it. She had me
replaced Naatje.

She came out of the convent and had a perfect education; being
an excellent musician, she made a living from giving piano lessons. I
had caught sight of her singing, a little before asking for medical leave;
when I returned six months later, she was completely changed. A big
pain, it seemed to me, had mainly changed the physiognomy. I
asked the students if she had been ill, although her face
expressed something else. Singing, I sat down next to her; I heard it
say: "I have odious domestic troubles ..."

The voice, the accent were not like those of the little girls
Brussels bourgeoisie who attend the Conservatory. Every time,
I stood next to her, and one day I asked her bluntly if
she had been grieved. Astonished, with tears in her eyes, she said
yes of the head. We went out arm in arm, but I didn't
asked no more this time. We were looking for each other
Classes. One day she fell into my arms and, her voice muffled, she told me
said that I was right, that a great misfortune had happened to them.

--Mum is a widow, she could no longer pay our pension, so she
made us come back. Me and the youngest had to improve at
piano for professorships; but I prefer the theater, I went to
song. The others helped Mum in the business.

Then his voice choked.

- Come on, don't tell me anything, but relieve yourself, cry.

And I kissed her.

--Rose, the prettiest of us, allowed herself to be seduced by a gentleman from
the nobility and went with him. The whole family is on their feet, but
we cannot find them. I went to the young man's father
man: the wretched old man offered to talk to me ...
way to live with mom, she became suspicious and gives us back
intolerable life.

I took him to my house for lunch.

- So you would like to become a singer?

--Ah! yes, as soon as possible ... the races across town for
piano lessons are killer and hardly bring in anything. There is
a lady who offered me seventy-five cents and tasted it, by
lesson, she lives a good hour from my house. Then I go to a
casserole who pretended to be the wife of a ship captain
always traveling. My God, if mom knew ... By that one, I got
yet another lesson from another gallant woman; there I am no longer
returned. One day, I arrive at her place, she was finishing lunch with
a man; she asked me to make them music, I didn't
wanted and left.

--Why do you give lessons in these circles, if they dislike you
so much?

--But we are in a black mash; mom hasn't done anything since
our misfortune.

--So you think you can make a living in the theater with your voice?

--My voice?

- Listen, you can see that I love you: what I am going to tell you
is not to hurt you, but your voice is not enough
beautiful for the theater. Why don't you go to the declamation?

--The declamation! What is that? Does this exist, can we
make a position out of it? because I have no time to waste, I have to
earn money: I still have a little sister and mom is no longer
good for nothing.

--But certainly, the actresses of comedy, drama and tragedy
come out of the declamation. Work a few years: with your allure
and your physiognomy, you will then only have to leave for Paris, and, without
that you have opened your mouth, we will engage you ... We like it a lot
greenhouse types like yours.

When she mentioned it at home, I had the whole family against me. I
wanted to crush her, I was jealous of her voice ... Marthe might say
that my voice was incomparably more beautiful than his, that since
that I had spoken to her, she had compared her voice to others and
found that she was not gifted with an organ for the theater ...
No one wanted to give up: it was the urge that drove me.

But she held on and entered the declamation. In the meantime, I had had
my explanation with the secretary; so I could no longer follow her to the
Conservatory, but I sent for her to accompany me on the piano,
happy to be able to relieve her in this way. And these were us
exquisite afternoon. I sang first: all Grieg passed there, and Brahm and
Schumann.

--What a delicious voice! she exclaimed every moment.

They were so many shocks to my heart.

Afterwards, I made her rehearse. His temper was still closed, and
she did not know how to give what was needed; but, one day that I had him
Said _Andromache_ as I understood it, a curtain moved away from the front
it. Since then she has been living clearly.

One afternoon in March, we were looking at huge buds on the one
chestnut tree in my garden.

- Marthe, they remind me of the music of _Lohengrin_.

--What?

--But, yes, _Lohengrin _... His love with Elsa is so heavy with
desire, so tense, that it is like these buds that the sap makes
throbbing and ready to burst ...

--Good Lord! for someone who knows so little music, you have some
sensations!

--But is it fair?

--I don't know, I must be careful when I hear again
_Lohengrin _...

And she was going to give her lessons, her boots taking the water, the
too thin, preoccupied, but still smiling at the sun, at the
life, also exhaling the scent of a bud, followed by the men who
were whispering proposals in her neck ... Exhausted, but full of
Courage, she was coming back to my house for dinner, her home being restored
impossible by his mother.

I would have liked her to work another year, but she does not
could more. She left for Paris with her second prize. She is
presented to a theater director, who hired him without having
heard, on his physique and his second prize. Then he asked her if
she had enough to live on: on her answer that she had borrowed a hundred
francs to come to Paris, he said:

--The theater will think of you.

And he gave her a sum of money in the name of the theater.

Since she told me this trait, I have worshiped this man: he
saved from certain loss a woman who has become a great
actress.

--What would I have done? she said to me. I had arrived in the afternoon; I
see that they are giving _Andromache_ to the French, I take a balcony. during
the intermissions, I walked around the foyer; young and old
were circling around me, an old man had emboldened himself to speak to me. This
that evening, the scare made me run away, but the next day, if that
director had not given me enough to live on, I should have accepted
the proposals of one of his males.

She had been lucky all the same: first to have met me,
me who pushed her against all odds in her true path, then this
clairvoyant and good director ... And now I can't hear any more
of her than by the newspapers ... I am alone, alone ...
confidences to a man, even when you adore him? what are men
understand women, apart from what directly attracts them? ...

So I devour my obsessions. The past haunts me, visions make me
jump and run in the room to escape them.

It's Kees, baby, screaming with hunger and cold, stubbornly stuffing himself
both hands in the mouth. My mother runs around offices and homes
charitable. I have to look after our children. Hein is sitting,
silent and sulky, on a seat, almost blind from anemia. Dirk plays
quietly on the ground, with her headless doll; it has become
insensitive to hunger and cold. Naatje is stubborn and blue ... But
Kees, whom I want to coax him by nodding him in my arms, and
flipping once on his back and once on his stomach, Kees is
intractable and buried himself, in angry cries, the handcuffs in the
mouth. They are literally macerated to be sucked and nibbled
day and night.

Not knowing what to do, I sit down, Kees lying on his back in my
bosom. He continues to cry and suck; her tears make two furrows on
her cheeks puffy with screams, and what tears ... so already, they
struck me by their size and clarity ...
cry, he becomes paler and paler, his screams are less
voluntary and end in a moan, but his jaws and
lips fiercely suck four fingers, two from each hand.

Kees was not a waste of humanity: he was a handsome little bugger,
who cried as he laughed, with all his greedy soul.

Go away! go away! foul vision! Because I went through these tortures,
I can no longer enjoy nature and art, without you
interpose between me and the enchanting image. All my childhood, all
my early youth, my health, isn't that enough? or did that take away the
right to enjoy life?

In the streets, I scan the faces and the paces, to discover the
calamity which could engender such or such expression. I know what
pain or what sensation causes that hunched gait, the head in
shoulders. I know that shoes shrunk from humidity give
this gait, as on eggs, and that the icy breeze, through
clothes that are too thin, stiffen the legs and make the
behind. I know this man has a nail going into his plant
feet, this one shakes itself because the vermin harasses it, and this
other because the dirt ankylosis. I know the yellow figure and
emaciated from this woman came to her to be fed only on bad
chicory bread and water ...

What a curse! No poor escape me, and I live again
continually their misery and their trances. And hate and love
collide in my head, like inseparable ... like old man
libidinous makes me want to push it under the wheels of the tram, and I
wish blood poisoning to such obese lady suffocating with excess
of table...

What continual trepidation! I carry an evil in me, and it cannot
to be that misery and its consequences that gave it to me ...




  "My best Keetje, it's been years since I've seen you." Naatje says
  that you have become a lady: she also told me that you would like to raise
  a child. I have ten, and, if you want one of my boys, I offer you
  my little Willem. He is five years old, very solid, very good and cheerful.
  If that suits you, you just have to come and get it.

  "Your brother

  "EH."

This letter overwhelmed me. Have a child! I had wanted some
ardently, while being afraid. In my position, how dare to take
on oneself this responsibility to bring a being into the world? ... I wanted
run to André, but I was afraid of his mother's reflections, which
would have prevented action. In the evening, when he came, I translated the
letter.

- But it is very serious to raise a child ... then how is it?

--Ah! you can rest easy, he must be fine. Naatje told me that he
looks like Huh ... My life is ruined, I could devote myself to this little one.

- Obviously, this is the most admirable goal. Let me think
until tomorrow.

The next day, already early, he arrived at my house.

- Go and get it, we cannot avoid an act whose future
of a being can depend ... If we fail, we will always have done
our best, and between a life of moral and physical misery and what
we are able to give it, we have no right to hesitate.

The two of us carried the telegram announcing to my brother my arrival at
Amsterdam.

I had loaded myself with a big bag of candy, and a shawl to surround
the little. It was freezing very hard; snow, in the streets of Amsterdam,
was covered with a layer of ice; in front of my brother's cellar,
the street was raised by it. When I opened the door, ten kids, including
the eldest was twelve years old, they stopped fighting. They were at
half naked, hair in brush, the area around the nose and
mouth inflamed with dirt, burns all over from approaching
too close to the fire and playing with reddened pokers. They
all swarmed there, on the ground, on the damp floor, under which
the water made "cloc cloc" when we walked. A smell of urine and
mold, overheated and confined air, suffocated me.

- I am your aunt ... I must open the door or I suffocate ...

I opened it. The wind, scathing like a whip, sent a
large lump of snow in the cellar.

`` You see, '' yelped the elder, taking the ball in his arms and
throwing on the porch, you see, you must not open the door, because,
when these peats are burned, there will be no more, and at night we
frozen.

- Where are your parents? I'm your aunt, I'm coming to get Willem.
Who is Willem?

`` It's him, '' they said in unison, pointing to a seated little man.
on the ground, having on his little body blue with cold only a rag of
unspeakable shirt.

He was looking at me with his mouth open. His flat nose was swollen; very
beautiful clear blue eyes, a huge bulging forehead, and a cool radiance
and questioning all over the face. Was it the eyes or the forehead that
lighted up that puffy and earthy face? ...
poor man's yellow hair, straight, filled with vermin; a short body,
thick feet and handcuffs, and sturdy little limbs in
were a curious little fellow.

"So it's you, Willem," I said; where are your father and mother?

--Mother went to wash, and father to look for work.

Ah! what a voice! a real tinkling of bronze and silver. He must have
a beautiful laugh ... I lifted him from the ground.

--God, what a weight!

He couldn't stand on his legs.

"It's the dampness of the floor," the girl explained. When he walked
a little, it goes away.

He waddled along like a goose.

--Ah! but I forgot to give you candy.

They swallowed them almost without chewing them.

- Again, madame.

- I am your aunt, Aunt Kee. I won't give you more, if you don't
don't chew them.

My brother came home.

--There you are...

- Boy, boy, what a lady you are, you are going to intimidate my wife who is
at ease with the scum ...

--Naatje told me that; you boys all made one
choice, as women ...

--What do you want? we were badly dressed, no money in our pocket ... So,
we didn't dare to talk to other girls: they wouldn't have
wanted from us.

--Ah! that's why...

- Obviously! that's why ... Did you think it was out of taste? I have
left Brussels, disgusted at never having a hot meal, never
buttons to my shirt. I fall here in Amsterdam; I didn't know any more
nobody. My boss' maid smiled at me; she was ugly, but,
in the evening, I could go to her kitchen, she had kept me from her
dinner of fried smelts and sautéed potatoes
in oil; at night she mended my socks and washed my
laundry. I thought I had found a pearl and I married her ... She
brought me this girl as a dowry.

He showed me the oldest child.

`` Ah, that's the one, '' I said, `` she looks like a good little sister.

--Yes, it is my child like the others ... But the little happiness that
we could have sunk under this avalanche of children. How? 'Or' What
bring it all to life? My wife is going to wash all week. When I
works, it works, but, here as elsewhere, there is unemployment, and
so...

A shrug ended his thought.

- Finally, I have beautiful children ... How do you find the little one?

- My faith, he is not to his advantage at the moment.

--You say that for her upturned nose ... Believe me, it is an exquisite
little creature, you will have fun.

The woman did not say much in the evening. The cunning figure, to
the dishonest expression displeased me.

I tell them several times:

--If you give me this child, you must not take it from me: this
it would be terrible to plunge him back into misery.

When my brother drove me to my hotel, I repeated my question: if
it was good forever that he wanted to give me his son.

The next morning I went to buy some clothes for Willem. I the
washed, dressed him. He laughed: I was right, he had a beautiful laugh
full and sonorous ... The mother was more and more silent, and, when
she saw her child transfigured as well, I surprised in her eyes
the most unexpected expression: an expression of intense envy, a
expression of preferring to see her child degenerate into misery with her than
to see him happy in others, an expression of a tyrant who has the right
of life and death on a being and chooses death, if it is his right
pleasure.

I was so afraid of this woman that I told her that I liked better
leave without the little one, which they had given me, but not willingly.

"Nonsense," replied Hein. You wouldn't want her to laugh at the moment
where one of her children leaves her.

It was agreed that I would write monthly and that, twice a year, the
little one would go home for eight days.

My brother carried him to the station, put me in a compartment and
we left. I was relieved to no longer see the phosphorescent gaze
of my sister-in-law.

On the train, a lady gave the little one an orange; the poor kid
knew so little what it was that he bit deeply into it. My God,
what a grimace! ... when I had peeled it, he refused to eat it,
fear it was still bitter.

He didn't want to let his nose wipe off.

- No, it hurts when you pinch.

--But I won't pinch you!

I had all the trouble in the world to persuade him, and when I had him
wiped clean without hurting him, he looked at me in surprise.

On arrival in Brussels, he was asleep. I gave it to a commissionaire
who carried him in a cab. As I apologized for the child
had peed in her panties:

--Oh! madam, it's nothing, we know what kids are!
up to five to six years old, they all do ...

As it was only six o'clock when I arrived home, I could not
prevent me from cutting his short hair, for vermin, from washing him
with soap, fill my tub with hot water and put it there.
soaping of importance. He found it exquisite and when I put him to bed
naked between my white sheets, he rolled over and stretched, his eyes
shiny and mouth-watering well-being.

--Oh! aunt, how good it is! aunt, how good it is! ...

And he threw his big little arms around my neck and kissed me
frantically.

- How beautiful it is here, aunt ... can I stay here?

--Yes, darling, it is your house, and tomorrow you will see your uncle.

- I also have an uncle?

--Yes, an uncle with a beard.

- Father has only one mustache. Does he kick like
dad?

--Ah! no, he will kiss you.

--So it's good.

- Now get up; you have to put yourself on the potty, because you don't
can't pee in that beautiful bed.

--But, aunt, I can't pee in there: there are flowers.

- Come on, that's what it is.

--And you keep it in that pretty little cupboard? he said, in me
seeing the vase locked in the nightstand.

Two minutes later he was asleep.

The next day when I woke up he was sitting looking at me with
astonishment.

--Ah! Wimpie, don't you remember? you are with your aunt Keetje, you
now stay with me.

He was jubilant to be put back in hot water and to be rubbed.

--It smells good, aunt.

Then when we got downstairs and I ushered him into the dining room
eat, he stopped and looked at everything, amazed.

- One more room, aunt, is it ours too?

--Yes, here we will eat.

And I sat him down on a chair with heavy books on it.

The sweet milk, the gingerbread toast, the pretty cup, the pretty
plate, nothing escaped him, and his face and his voice expressed a
ecstasy, as if living a fairy tale. Then I showed him the
living room, then the kitchen.

- Aunt, are you sure I can live in there?

--Yes always.

--And when will Catootje and Keesje come? because they must also have
all of this.

--Surely. They will come soon.

I led him to the attic. There was an old stove there as well as
tips: he immediately handled them.

--Ah! I will be able to work here as a father. I also want to be a blacksmith.
We settled in the room where I had my books, my machine
to sew and my dress model. He immediately danced on the sofa,
to break the springs.

I was a little afraid of the first contact with André: the little one, despite his
two washes, was still very rough, well a neglected child, and his
shaved head did not add to her beauty; we only saw his flat nose and
swollen.

Indeed, André considered him for a long time.

--Ah! damn it, it is not beautiful ...

--He will change; if you had seen him at his house, you would not have taken him.

--Does he seem a dead end child enough ...

`` Yes, my dear, this is the hallmark of misery ... I was like that, but
now I don't rub off next to you.

- Come on, that's the first impression. I think it doesn't seem
not at home ... your skin and hers ...

Then he tried to talk to the little one.

--What is he saying, aunt? my uncle does not know how to speak ...

--That's another nice thing: a child with whom I will not be able to
exchange a word ...

--But it will be a matter of a few months, he will speak very quickly on
French.

I gave the child to the maid and went out with André. When he me
left, I went to buy linen, stockings and aprons for Willem,
as well as blue serge to make him a costume, and a beautiful
soft brown fabric for an overcoat.

I bought cakes with corinthes from the baker, to take with the
tea. Passing through the bazaar, I choose a white horse, a cart
and a spade, then a doll, and I hurried towards the house. As soon as
I had put the key in the lock, he came running up, Suzette, the cat,
frolicking beside him, and shouted:

- Aunt, aunt, it's you! ...

We had tea in my working room. I started to carve
breeches and a jacket in blue serge. He was playing, sitting on the
carpet, alternately with the horse and the doll, but above all with the
doll he called "Catootje". Suzette, the cat, was sitting in
in front of him, looking at him quietly ... No, but does he
delicious here, do i have a home of my own ... and i was cutting and squeezing,
intoxicated with moral and physical well-being, and when I tried her
panties, which puffed around her little butt, I would have bitten
in...

Two days later, I dressed her in her new costume, her beautiful
overcoat, in a pretty beret that he set himself aside, and I went
introduce to André's mother.

--It is a heavy load that you have drawn yourself there, and you are not going to
love more than this child, and you will not be rewarded. If you
count on the recognition of people, you will be disappointed.

--But no, I am not thinking of recognition, nor of being
rewarded. I thought of the child: if I can make a man out of him ... I
think I can, the background is very good.

--Is he smart? he only knows Flemish.

--No, Dutch, Flemish is a patois and Dutch is a
language...

--If he's smart, he'll know French in a few weeks. But
the Flemish are not for learning ...

--But, madame, he is not a Flemish: between a Flemish and even a
Belgian, and a Dutchman, there is room. The Dutch, since
Reform, educate themselves in all classes of society; they
comment on the Bible daily and, whether it is the Bible or
the_Iliade_ is always to comment on a beautiful book, it is to cultivate oneself,
and here we do not comment at all.

--But you were not educated yet ... André told me that you
gave teachers.

- Exactly, my mother was not Dutch, and she had been seated as soon as
age eight, on a small bench, with a tile to make
lace on the knees; and, as an intellectual culture, we
had the rosary recited and litanies chanted.

`` But, my mother, '' said André, `` to know French in a few weeks ...
you know very well that I haven't been able, in how many years, to learn
German ...

--Oh! German! she said ...

When we were in the street with André ...

--You are not going to let yourself go up in your head, and believe that Willem is
stupid, if he doesn't know French in a few weeks; then you don't go
also not believe that I will not love you anymore because I will love this
child.

- But no! ... my mother has ideas of her own ... we will all love each other
three.

His face, at this moment, expressed such kindness, he looked at me with
so much love that I felt like joy penetrate me.

--André, if the three of us went to the Bois ... Wimpie has never seen
the country, we will make him drink hot milk at the Laiterie.

And we took the tram to the Bois de la Cambre.

                   * * * * *

My life was totally changed. When I rang in the morning
Wimpie and Suzette rushed up the stairs. The pussy was leaping
on the bed, took my head between his two paws, and licked my
figure as she did with her cubs. Willem was frolicking around the
bed. He often wore sooty handcuffs.

--I have already worked on the stove pipes, to make them fit together:
it's very difficult ... you see i'm black, but i can't
work and be clean.

And he rubbed his little blackened paws, one inside the other.

- We'll have to start giving you a bath again.

- But no, aunt, but no, washing my hands is enough, I put it on purpose
an old apron.

There was no longer any question of me reading, because I wanted to take care of
the child.

                   * * * * *

After eight days I received a letter from the mother saying that one of
his children had everything and the others nothing, only this comparison
was painful. She was asking if I couldn't send them some
clothes and money. I sent twenty francs.

Eight days later, another letter for the rent: I sent another twenty
frank.

Eight days later, new letter: they had to move and give
a deposit on the rent; I sent ten francs. Next week,
another letter for money!

So I wrote that I had relieved them of a child who would be at
safe from misery throughout his life, but that it was impossible for me
to do more, that I myself depended on someone. By return from
courier I was told that I had to bring the little one back. I replied that I do not
would not bring it back, that they had given it to me: that I had started to
devote to him; that he changed and became very beautiful, that he was
happy, and sang and danced all day, for the joy of life;
that it was impossible that they, his parents, wanted in cold blood,
because they could not exploit me at their will, rush him to
new to misery, from which a miracle had drawn him; that they owed
reflect; that not only was he, Willem, out of it for life,
but still his posterity; that it was the only Oldema who could
normally develop his faculties, which my companion had already done
a will which put him in the shelter, and that he certainly
would treat his whole life like his child.

They replied that they had none of this, and that
not that one brother had everything and the others nothing; that I had to return
the child.

Answer: "You are bullies, and I am not giving it back."

I was no longer alive, I expected every moment to see them appear.
They had no money to pay for the train: but, two months later,
my brother arrived in Brussels, and accompanied by Naatje, came to my house.
From the door I grabbed him by the shoulders and shook him, unable to
articulate a word, your throat as tight as in a vice. I took the child
on my knees, wrapping my arms around her. I stuttered, in sounds
hoarse:

--You dare come and take it away from me to plunge it back into this ignominy
that is misery. You dared to use this child as bait,
to exploit me, and, because I can't let myself be, you
resume, without mercy. So look ... what it is now, and what
it was...

--But he got thinner.

- Yes, he is no longer lymphatic, he is becoming muscular, he is nervous.

In no time, I had him naked.

- See what skin, and her hair and teeth ... Look what adorable
little guy, and you're going to make it the little monster from before.

Wimpie was crying.

- I don't want to go, aunt.

- My wife won't let me sleep anymore, she is wasting away, she cries at night and
day.

--It is a comedy! if she could mow me she would be happy to
leave it to me.

--So, obviously, there would be compensation ...

--But the compensation is to know that he is happy.

- I can no longer live with my wife ... Besides, I had to
spend everything he has here, he will also be able ... And there you go ...
Then this is our child ... is not it, Wimpie, will you come
with your father?

Wimpie clung to me.

For three days, André and I, we did as much and as long as
left without him.

I had no news at first, but soon I received a letter from my
sister-in-law, saying she would take her rent money to come
look for her own child. I sent him a hundred francs,
begging to leave him to me until after the summer: "I will make him pass
several months at sea: then he will have gained strength, and will be able to
resist the existence that awaits him ”. I had no answer, but
she did not come.

                   * * * * *

Here I am once again in trances and nightmares ... However
a vague hope made me take care of the education of the little one, as
if his future depended on it. We took long walks, where
I drew his attention to anything I thought was interesting.

I was warmly anti-militarist, and the little one, like all children,
was very drawn to the soldiers. So, showing him the
troops, I said:

`` Look, Wimpie, these are men who have been dragged from their homes to
train them to kill their fellows.

At the end of a month, he hated them.

I didn't have love for my country, I told myself that the proletarian is
operated in all countries. But since then I have felt what the
difference of race can cause clashes, that we can not be happy
than among his own. If I had a child today to bring up, I would
would tell him:

--When you are twenty years old, you will put on a similar costume, and you will
you will do your best to prevent the stranger from coming to sit in the chair
of your grandfather and bastard your race.

                   * * * * *

We always stopped in front of a dead end in the neighborhood: there
called the ragged children "Catootje" and "Jan", after his brothers
and sisters.

- Aunt, see, this Catootje has no handkerchief: what a nose, my
God!

--Give him your handkerchief, with these ten cents.

And he was running, jabbering French to make himself understood by the
small.

When I came back with him from André in the evening, I showed him the
stars, saying that those that twinkled were suns and
the rest of the land, but that the suns were not all of the
same color: that there were blue, orange, yellow, and
still other colors that I did not know. Often he would stop me, and his
little head raised, he showed me a sparkling star:

- Aunt, it's a sun.

--Yes, it's blue.

--Blue, is it like your dress?

--Yes, my dress is blue, but this sun is more like the ribbon, on
Mieke's Sunday hat: electric blue.

--And if we had two suns, or three suns, how would he do?

--If the earth had several suns, each would draw it to itself, and,
instead of spinning around, it would pivot on itself in the middle
of them. When we were in front of the blue sun, everything would have a reflection
blue, even our face and our hands; then, approaching the sun
yellow, the two colors would mingle, and I believe we would, in
that time, greens.

--Green, aunt?

--I think so. I once put a blue tie in the water with
saffron, and it turned green: so I believe that we too
we would turn green ... but, turning again, we
closer and closer to the yellow sun, and we would have a reflection
yellow: you know, like in the morning, when you say that my hair is
Golden...

--Aunt! aunt! how I would like to have all these suns ...
sleep more, to watch them night and day.

- Here is where the danger would be: two suns would be too much for our
earth, it would be clear night and day, there would be no more dew, and
we would not find enough rest. Because, while sleeping, you grow up, and
your intelligence is refreshed: then you have to sleep, sleep a lot ...
Come on, it's time to go to bed.

--Oh! aunt, let me watch again ... how are the beasts on
a land with a blue sun?

--How do you want me to know? we can't go and see.

--Are the Wimpies there aunts like you, and should we
learn French?

`` I'm telling you that we can't go and see, then! ...

He remained grave, grave, contemplating the sky. I know nothing
moving like a serious little child, who tries to understand.

                   * * * * *

I had not lowered the blinds or turned on the lamp. I was sat down
in my chair, with Wimpie on my lap; the moon was very
clear, and large clouds were riding in front of her. I didn't say anything
to the little one, but I was watching this fantastic parade. He followed my gaze.

- There, aunt, we see her again, the cloud is gone, but another
all black is advancing. What is the moon, aunt?

--It is a ring fallen from the earth, which remained suspended between the
earth and the sun ... No, it's not quite that, well it rolls
with us around the sun, but it always turns the same side towards
him. So it heats up and lights up horribly on one side; but of
the other side it's still dark and very cold, colder than when
it's freezing and there's two feet of snow; and then, we suffocate there.

"Can't we go either, aunt?"

--Not impossible.

"Not even with the steam tram?"

- No, with nothing.

--She is very pretty, aunt; what a pity we can't go there ...

--But since you would suffocate, and you would be roasted by going to a
half, and frozen to break into small pieces in the other half ...

"But how do you know all this, if you've never been there?"

--By books ... you will see, when you can read, what beautiful
things you will learn.

- I want to read, aunt.

--The doctor thinks that you are too small, that you must wait.

- So when I'm older, will I have books?

--Yes, as many as you like: your uncle has, in the country, all the
books, with pictures, in which he learned, and he promised
that they would all be for you.

- I have to sleep to grow taller: then I am going to bed.

--We still have supper.

He knelt on my knees, took my head between his little ones
handcuffs, and kissed my whole face.

- Aunt, you are my Wimpie, and my uncle is also my Wimpie.

                   * * * * *

As Willem was sleeping longer than usual, I went to his
bedroom. He slept with an ecstatic expression all over his face.
Soon he woke up. He looked around, a little disappointed.

- Aunt, why did you remove all the flowers? Sometimes the bedroom
was filled with flowers.

- I took nothing away, you dreamed.

- Dreaming, what is it?

--It's ... I don't know ... Dreaming is seeing or doing things,
while we sleep.

- I always see flowers, always flowers, aunt ...

--Come quickly for your bath.

                   * * * * *

- Aunt, tell me something.

--Well, listen ... You probably think there have always been
houses, people and beasts on the earth?

- Yes, aunt.

--Well no. The earth, which is hard now and where it grows
flowers, trees, turnips and potatoes, and where the man
built houses and boulevards, is a detached part of the
sun, which began to spin in the sky on itself and around
from the sun. It was first a gas bubble, like a bubble
of soap, but tall, tall like the whole world ... She shone
like a sun, then like a star, and it has passed through several
colors. It was bubbling, spitting, and giving off a black vapor
around her. But, as she whirled madly, in a great
empty, where it was appallingly cold, a crust formed on the
sticky mass that it had become and which still continues to burn in
in.

And after a very long time, when all the vapor had disappeared and was
fell to form the seas, which were then lukewarm, - you will see the
sea, this summer, - large pieces of this crust have lifted off
some water; these are the lands. And still a long time later,
plants that grew in the seas or started to stir gently,
without moving from place to place, and gradually became beasts; and when
the waters were withdrawing, for they come and go, these beast plants
had to get used to living dry. Many are no doubt dead, but
others acclimatized and began to crawl. Those who do not
failed to move became trees. Herbs and
plants also grew on the land.

And, even a long time later, in place of a thick skin, these animals
are covered with hair and feathers; instead of crawling, they have
lifted their belly, and here they are on all fours ... They walked,
then climbed, and I believe that in order to fly like birds, it was necessary
long time...

So the animals were enormous, bigger than a house: in
flying, they cast great shadows on the earth and obscured
by day, like a big black cloud; and, while walking, they smashed the
Earth. They devoured each other terribly. Trees too
were gigantic: those of the Bois de la Cambre are twigs with
side.

"He created himself in the long run, the monkeys, smarter than the
others, perhaps because they were less strong, and that, in order not to
to be eaten always, they had to continually invent ways
to defend themselves and to park. Little by little they stood up, and they
climbed on the trees where they lived.

- Aunt, I would like to live in a tree. The chestnut tree in the garden is
big enough: if we built a house on its branches ... it would be
good fun; we would climb up there with the ladder.

- A house is impossible, darling; a cage would still be fine ...
Then now we need beds, chairs, we must make up
cooked. How would we do it, perched on the branches?

"And they, aunt, weren't they eating?"

--Yes, but wild fruits and raw roots, acorns of
oak ... they are bitter, you don't like bitter things ... and everything
slowly, by his intelligence, this monkey has become man; but he
was not yet as beautiful or so white as he is now. As he had
often cold, he dressed in leafy branches; instead of living
on the trees, it took shelter in mountain holes. Then he has
built a hut with earth, and, as he could not find himself
nourish only those fruits and roots that he digged up with his hands,
he looked for something else, and, after yet a very long time, he
began to fight with animals to kill them. He ate their
raw flesh and dressed in their skin ... Then, for a long time
afterwards he took stones, of which he made knives and axes:
therefore, instead of fighting with the animals he wanted to eat, he
used his knife or his ax to kill them.

--But, aunt, if he had to fight with these wild beasts, he must have
often be bitten? I was bitten by a big dog, when I was
at my mother's house: it hurt a lot.

--He also invented the bow and arrow and he killed the beasts by surprise
and theft. It was less loyal, but more convenient ... He further found
fire, and he could cook the meat. Then again, long after, he has
sown. So he was a complete man, who was the master of the earth
and, instead of continuing to scratch the earth with his hands, he invented the
spade and plow ... He had also captured wild beasts that he
softened by skill and constraint. Instead of leaving their milk to
their young, he took it to drink it himself. But, like this the
was very tired of working the land, alone, he harnessed with
links of horses and cows, names he gave to animals
tamed, and so he was helped in his work.

"And little by little the man took everything: what is above the
earth, on earth and in earth. He never has enough. He built, he
demolished, he invented, he made and remade, he eats everything, he drinks
everything, he digests everything, he got rid of everything that bothered him ... And
here we are!

--And here we are! Wimpie said, stunned.

And it was this awakening sensitivity, this blossoming brain, it was
this sensual little man, with a slender, arched back, wide eyes
open to life, of which we were going to remake the puffy larva and
smelly that I had brought back six months before! And this out of envy
hateful, because we did not want him to have more than the others, and that
by a despotic power ... Because they had mated on a Saturday
evening, after libations, they had the right to life and death on the
product of this coupling! These unconscious beings, irresponsible by
their ignorance, have the right to annihilate a human creature ... Ah! than
it is odious, odious!

I was fidgeting in my room with fever in my cheekbones. From time to
time, I went to his bed to watch him sleep: he smiled, he saw
no doubt flowers, and the animals I had told him about ... My
Wimpie, my poor little Wimpie, how do you get out of what
waiting for you? ... In a few months, that's it ...
it's a bad dream ... you will be covered with burns again, your nose
flowing, spiky hair filled with vermin ... Nothing to do, they
have the right, the right to make you a brute, a wreck ...

His hand made the movement of caressing; her smile widened, while
that his lips were moving.

André entered. I threw myself into his arms, and we cried for a long time,
sitting on the little one's bed.

                   * * * * *

In June, I left with him for the island of Walcheren, where I had
a small peasant house by the sea. I had made it
panties with blouse sewn to the same, low-cut and sleeveless, in
light blue cotton, and off-white canvas aprons. In the morning when I
dressed him in this jumpsuit and one of these aprons, that I
wore nothing but rubber-soled shoes, and
with a wide-brimmed white hat, he asked me:

- Aunt, do we dress like that here? will I walk halfway like this
naked? you, however, you wear stockings ...

--Oh, but! I will remove them from the beach. You will see, we will flounder
in the sea.

I loaded it with a spade and a bucket, in which I put a
hand towel. I wanted him to see the sea all of a sudden in all its
greatness. For that we climbed a high dune from behind.

--Here! I said, at the top.

He remained silent, breathing in fits and starts, then:

- That's it, aunt, it's it's it's water ... it's blue, she
is green, and something else.

"Purple and violet," I added. Now let's go down.

- No, aunt, no, we can't walk on that, she will come on
us, it advances.

--She moves back too, look.

--Ah! Yes! What for?

- I'll tell you about it later. Come on, we'll go to the sand, then,
there between these pilots, we will look for mussels.

We went downstairs. He had become cautious, fearing that
the water would drag us away.

Soon he was jubilant in delirious joy ... the hot sand, the
shells ... Between the breakwaters, we looked, under the stones,
mussels with which we filled the bucket. Suddenly he straightened up
shouting and got on the defensive, back against a pilot, and one leg
lifted as if to kick.

--Aunt! Aunt!

It was a large crab which, with open scissors, advanced towards him in
his lateral walk.

I took the beast and put it in the bucket.

- Aunt, throw it away ... Aunt, is it one of those beasts that came out of the sea and
who have become men?

I wanted to say "yes" ...

--Small jug, you mustn't be so afraid. This beast is not
mean, but she defends herself, you understand ... we will do it
boil and eat it for our supper.

"But, aunt, it's _infame_," he said, in French.

--What are you saying? you repeat your uncle's words.

This little guy is always right, I thought.

--Come on, I'll dip you in the water.

I took off my stockings and my skirt; I put him naked. We were walking with small steps
in the sea. He was confident now, he was laughing out loud, when
the foam leapt in our face. He stammered with joy and emotion, and his
skin was so thin, her hair so blond, her gaze so radiant
blue, that it was one with the golden sand, the silvery water and
the atmosphere misted with a powder of mother-of-pearl. He embodied in this
moment the joy of living.

... Happiness is forbidden to me in this world, I have in front of me the
elements of the purest joy and beauty, and they are not to me
only elements of torture. I must attend this blossoming of a
lovely soul, and in three months ... and I can do nothing, nothing.

He did not understand why, all of a sudden, my face was
was contracting.

--But, aunt, you look like you're angry, I wasn't mean.

--My darling to me, you are all love, but my heart hurts.

                   * * * * *

Finally, the four months passed for him in astonishment. He
built forts with the other children and made pies in
sand. During the holidays, with André, we went on an excursion
all over the island, in a peasant cart. Wimpie's happiness
was to sit next to the peasant who passed the guides, in him
holding arms. But when we took a little Zeeland girl,
so he wanted to be next to her: she could carry her toy, and
he always asked for sweets so that she had some too.
We always came home, all intoxicated with the air and the light. Sometimes
the excess of fresh air put him to sleep, and it was a painful sweetness to me
to rock him in my arms.

                   * * * * *

However, I had to go back to Brussels, where I already found a
letter: they would arrive this time to two to take it. I answered
that I forbade them to come to my house and instructed Naatje to
come and get Wimpie.

I packed a large bundle of his clothes - I only kept his overcoat
capuchin - and Naatje, accompanied by the maid, the little one between them,
walked up the street. I was leaning out of the window of the
ground floor, and the screw move away. Before the curve he turned around
and greeted me with his arm, shouting:

- I'll come back, aunt, see you soon ... but don't cry, let's see,
you are my Wimpie.

And he took a few steps to come back. Naatje turned the corner for him.

Now is the measure full? ... what else can there be
happen to me? ... is it enough, is it enough now? ... and he, my
glorious little boy! ...

André had not wanted to attend his departure, but the maid saw him
who was watching them; when he saw them coming he ran away and came to
me.

We didn't say anything. In the evening I dined with him, where his mother assured me that
it was better that way, that I would not have collected any
recognition.

- Does that make you cry? Besides, why would they have given you
their child?

`` But, madame, so that he does not remain in this appalling misery which
is theirs ... André and I would have made a man out of him.

--Peuh! ... When I want to get something from people, I
start by buying them. Why would they do anything for you?
You have to buy them, that's all there is ...

André had his nose on his plate, and a hand clenched around his
spoon.

- What is the matter, André? you don't _man-ges_ ... I want to make you
look for oysters ...

And she put her foot on the button of the doorbell, placed under the
table. She sounded as if there was a fire in the house. Philomène ran up.

--Philomène, run and get a dozen oysters for sir,
_he does not know how to eat _...

- But no, mother, I don't want oysters.

--Yes! if! Do you want some too? Yes Da! it will make you forget your
grief. A dozen and a half, Philomène.

--But no but no! my mother, we don't want oysters ... what
we eat in this house!

He didn't want to take it. I took four, her mother ate them
other.

In the street, we walked awkwardly, and very softly he whispered:

- Come on, what do you want me to do? you don't choose your mother.

When André had left me, I resumed reading Heine, on the page where
I had abandoned it the year before. But it was in vain, his
bitterness did not match mine.




I had taken my little dog Bézy, an adorable griffin monkey, under my
large otter coat. Nothing but his smoky muzzle, the upturned nose
and with flaming eyes, came out from under this heavy garment. He
was fine, though humid, and, as it spends the winter in
the apartment, I wanted him to breathe some fresh air. Path
doing, talking to my little beast who was afraid of everything, I
saw a handcart, loaded with sand, harnessed with three dogs
muddy, tawny and fierce; they had their necks stretched out towards a house where
a butcher delivered meat; next to the cart, a woman,
as muddy and haggard as his animals.

I said to Bézy, showing him the dogs:

- Look, they are starving ...

The woman had heard me, and, furiously pushing the cart and
exciting the dogs against me, she followed me, cursing me:

--Yes, beautiful madam, we are starving: I, whom you did not count,
as well as my animals, and, if you want to know since when we
have not eaten, it has been since noon yesterday. At six in the morning, they and
I hitched up to the cart, and we do not manage to
sell a bucket of sand ... Even if they were mussels,
could we eat our merchandise, but sand ... yes we
let's die of hunger, good madam, what's the use of you noticing it? not
to help us surely, and, when you help us, it's never good
heavy ... Ah! a little quail like you would suit them perfectly,
and they wouldn't leave anything on your cute bones ... and even the monkey that
you wear under your coat, at least five hundred francs, we
would give great pleasure: he would pass there, hair and all, and I would claim some
a chop ...

She continued to excite her dogs; passers-by stared at me,
amused. Bézy, terrified, nevertheless bravely bared her teeth; me,
I was less proud, and I hastened my pace towards the house. While
I was waiting for someone to open the door to me, she kept calling me:

--A beautiful house like a beautiful lady ... it must be warm and
soft in there ...

His sarcasm was interspersed with hiccups: the dogs had slumped
in the mud.

--Virginia, give these beasts something to eat, and two francs to
wife.

- Madam does not think of it, it is a soularde: ten centimes is enough.

The woman continued to storm.

--Virginia, shut her up or go get the police ... no! no! not
that, but shut her up.

--However, this is the only way, madame, to get rid of this
shrew.

- It's okay, leave me.

Ah! minion, you are worthy of me, as I am worthy of you ... "Your
coat of five hundred francs, ”she said.
quadruple, but five hundred francs seemed to him a fortune ...
why did I make this reflection: "they are starving ..."
will continue to have money in the bottom of a drawer
to buy me frills and give trinkets to friends
who do not need it ... "They are starving" ... Why this
sterile pity? Why this tear in the eye? ... Ah! to hell,
when am I going to be in peace?




We had taken the tram to go to lunch in the Bois. I had counted
we walk there before the meal, to enjoy the trees with the foliage
golden, coppery, tanned; but André, as soon as he got off the tram, gave himself up
at such a fast pace that I was literally trotting beside him.

--André, why are we running like this? so look around you, it's
admirable.

He stopped abruptly, looked, and repeated, like a cliché, what he
had already said to me during a walk, a few days before:

--Yes, it is beautiful, the leaves are like forged in metal, it is
beautiful ... what opulence ... let's sit down ...

--I don't dare, I'm swimming so much you made me run.

He turned to me, astonished:

--I have tired you again and, this evening, you will have your pain ... My poor
friend, I only commit absurdities, I realize it and cannot
prevent me from starting over. Like reproaching yourself for being cheerful one day and,
the next day, to be sad ... What is happening in me? ... I am
always sadly awkward with you. You had the prettiest
nature that one could meet, and I damaged you by always denigrating the
women. Forgive me, I was too young to understand everything
that there was in you sensitivity and spontaneous goodness. I would have had
need to be guided myself. I damaged you ...

"But, André, what would I have been without you?" you have me admirably
advised, you have always loved me as I wanted to be, as a man, and
all your parents' theories against women and marriage have
nothing could change. Why do you blame yourself?

--It's when I see you so thin and your eyes so worried, like a
poor being harassed, who no longer knows if what he is doing is right or
bad ... forgive me, if you knew what I'm suffering ... my dream
adolescent, to produce a work that would have provided an idea for
the emancipation of humanity, crumbled, I felt
unable to realize it. I'm thirty-five, and I haven't done anything, and
I won't do anything ... There are days when I can't tie two
ideas. So I go to your place, and instead of taking what's left
you of love which asks only to give itself, I harass you like a gadfly.
How could you resist? you should hate me ...

- I hate you! ...

I don't know what I had in my eyes.

--And it's that look that I made fearful, that's that look that
I put on the defensive and that I made doubt of me ...

--I never doubted you, I never forgot that, since your
anatomical puncture, you suffered, that without it you could have worked.
So I never really blamed you ... you gave me everything
happiness that I knew, you watched over me: if I understand all
this beauty around us is thanks to you. Without you I wouldn't be
never left my gangue: I owe you everything, everything, and I had your young
more love ... Don't worry, I got the best of you ... But you
never told me about all this and, for a little fatigue that I
feel, you blame yourself. It's not worth it.

--For a while now, I have felt that I have been unfair to you too often.

- Come on, you are not well: it is you who are tired of
still absorb you in books and what books ... old ones
rancid philosophers ... Colins! ... how can you swallow that? Do you know
what? Let's spend the winter in Domburg in our little house; the sea
hand you over, we won't take a book, we will go on excursions
around the island, dressed as Eskimos ...

But he was no longer listening to me, and his eyes wandered absent.

We went to the restaurant. His walk accelerated again, he
didn't seem to know me there. I was so happy that he
could have made me gallop like this to La Hulpe without my having
complaint...

I ordered lunch. He ate so quickly that he swallowed
through and, with big tears in his eyes from being strangled, he
laughed for a long time at his awkwardness. Barely left, he resumed his
race: he didn't even hear me when I was talking about taking the
tramway, and, along Avenue Louise, we looked like two
pursued. I arrived at my house, transfixed; continued on his way
almost without looking at me.

I was still anxiously wondering what was going on inside him,
when one of his friends, a doctor, came to talk to me.

--I wanted to talk to you about André: I saw you running along
the Avenue; the other day, I saw him again, running like this with his
mother who fell ... Then he is still congested: you should
prevent him from devoting himself exclusively to intellectual work.

--But I can not; at home, we obsess over him to write a book
social economy. He told me about his grief at feeling tired and
unfit for work.

- If at home he is pushed to that, he must be made to leave. Go pass
winter in the South, and in any case remove all occupation
intellectual.

I went to his mother. When I spoke of the Midi:

--Ah! you want to take a trip ...

"Not in the least, madame, but Andre needs it." Do you see
not that he's so excited and if I don't know how ...

--It is nothing, it has always been so.

- But no, he's not like he used to be, he's absent.

- Absences, my son? We have brains too well done: none
failure cannot happen to us from that side.

Nothing to do, she thought that I wanted to take a trip, and that
I would invent anything to achieve my ends.

The doctor friend himself came to persuade the father, and we left.

This trip was almost a gallop; it was only in Nîmes where André
agreed to stay two days. He was also very good, the head
free to be in the fresh air all day long, in pure weather and
gorgeous. We rejoiced with enthusiasm in the Arena, but he made me
go through the throes of fear, walking all the way up, on the
extreme edge of the steps, with the void next to it. I dared not say anything because
he would have continued on purpose ... The Baths impressed us greatly: we
thought to the beautiful naked Romans who had walked there at the same
square.

But the Maison Carrée !!! ... André recited verses in Greek or Latin,
I did not know very well: he was transfigured. We spent half a day
to turn around this temple, and as much inside. In the evening it does
did not want to go out, to remain under this impression. We served
coffee in our room. He was still reciting Greek or Latin verses.
We went to bed early. He regretted not having taken a book
old man to read it to me. Among the few volumes he had taken,
found a Laforgue. He leafed through it and read _la Femme_ to me, then he
threw.

- The man never acts confraternally with the woman, he said all.
suddenly, bitter.

--But, André, it becomes an obsession; you have already spoken to me like this at
Wood.

--Ah! ... I do not remember ... It obsesses me, as you say. I am in pain
acted towards you: when a friend told me that you were pretty, I felt
a dirty feeling of a conceited male. I loved you much more for your
figure and your line only for what was really superior in
you: you know how to forget yourself and ignore yourself.

--Is it a superiority? If I'm worth something, do I have the right to
to sacrifice ... to a Naatje, let's say?

--These are arguments, but your gesture goes straight to the necessary goal,
and, if tomorrow you find yourself faced with an inextricable difficulty, your
instinct would show you without hesitation what to do, and
you would ... But the trials are over for you, we are
still young and we will have long years of happiness
together: no more sorrow will come from me, no more influence
will not have a hold on me.

--How can you get into your head that you have done wrong? I also
loved you for your laughter and for the gestures of your hands.

- There you are, you prove me right, my gestures and my laughter are part of my
mentality ... Always the woman, even when she loves a fool, he
attribute superior qualities of intelligence and morality,
while we! ... I thought I was doing a lot by giving you some
teachers, but I didn't do half of what I should have. I
left you alone in the country for months, and when I came to you
see, I received letters from my mother, saying that I had to
to come back to keep my father company; and I left, leaving you
still alone, you who so need to communicate your feelings ...
Then, in what equivocal position did I put you, young and pretty as
you were? any bourgeois would have cheated on me ... why didn't I
taken in my life? we should have lived together for a long time.

- I repeat, it becomes an obsession. I have often been alone, but
since you owed yourself to your parents ...

--Yes, it was my parents who made me commit this iniquity. They
have brought forth a child for them, and, were he sixty years old, he could not
have personality ... I have to think like them, I have to act like
them, I must eat like them, and my father says that if his son does not
should not share his ideas, he would bequeath all his fortune to anyone
who thinks like him ... They did not insist when I gave up the
medicine, to better keep me under their dependence ... My mother lived
in the terror that my father would disinherit me, and, when he had to
coming back from my trip, she warmed me up in advance: it should not be
annoy, he had worked all his life to acquire me
independence, I could not cause him the pain of showing that I
thought otherwise than him, it would destroy all the ideal and the goal
even of his life ... Above all, I should not talk to him about the woman,
since he can't stand them ... So when he came home, I was like
a little boy: instead of discussing my ideas, I had to agree
to his; instead of being able to speak of the woman as a companion,
it was necessary to speak of it as of an inferior ... As for the questions
art, it was nonsense ... If I deviated as little as it was
of my father's prejudices, I saw my mother's terrified gaze
implore me ...

»So I never dared to talk to him about you: he knows very well that you
exist, but he doesn't want you to occupy a place in my life, less
out of prejudice against you than against woman and marriage ... My mother does not
admitted that to make me believe that she is my slave, and because
that a bourgeois marriage would have taken me away from them ... I am their toton ...
but the day I would like to leave you, she would take care of
tell you ... You know, she regrets that you don't have children ...

- That's right, I always told you that she would undermine me anyhow.

--Like this sociology book, they raised me to write it ...
I never write a book, it will be a book of life: the rest of the
sentences ... My father got hold of the idea of ​​the “Superman”; it's man
to be, but for them to be a man is to surrender to
all his bad tendencies ... no, to be a man is to fight them
and try to become the best you can be ...

--But, André, you judge them so severely ... Why, guessing them so
well, have you let yourself be annihilated like this? This has often surprised me, and I
am sometimes asked if you loved me completely.

- You see, I made you doubt me.

- No, but I believed that your parents and your humanitarian ideas
passed before.

--I once thought that the woman was an obstacle, but since then
I see for a long time that she can and must walk with us. Anyway,
come what may, I want you to live and fight with me from now on. You
are my wife, only marriage before the law is against
my convictions ... My father will do what he wants.

- Listen, let's not break the windows, and, since he's going to settle in the
campaign for his health, let's wait until he is there ... And your mother?

--I will tell her that if she does not want you to come to my place, I
will settle in with you.

With a cuddly gesture, he slipped lower under the covers, his head
On my chest. So I felt his whole body was burning ... he
soon fell asleep. His eyelids were throbbing and a sweat was flooding him ...
Great God, how can we protect him against what lies ahead? because some
sinister thing awaits us ... how to do so that nothing can
reach him? ... He is coughing: perhaps he has tuberculosis. It is necessary, what
that he happens, that he heals ... He is rich, we will spend until
last penny to heal him, I will heal him night and day ...
What's in store for us? Help, my God, help! ...

I was ready to cry out for help; I buried the sheet in my mouth,
so as not to wake him up with my sighs. The warmth of her body put me on
in unbearable discomfort, but the movement of his head on my
chest was so confident, her hands with fingers spread to seek
of the freshness were so touching, that until the middle of the night I
kept him entwined. Then he pulled away from himself and started talking to me again
of our future life.

This is the last talk where he could lucidly develop his thoughts,
and it was to express my love to me.

                   * * * * *

We returned after three weeks. He immediately informed his
mother he wanted to live with me. She exclaimed:

`` But I rather thought it was going to end between you two ...

He turned pale and, with trembling lips, he announced to her that he would settle down
at home, if she believed that there was no room for me in
their house.

--Oh! I don't say that, I don't say that ... Besides, I have to go with it
your father in the country, and you still need someone here.

We lived several weeks, very quiet. He was a little
restless, but charming. Then all of a sudden one night he got up and lit
gas all over the house, wound up all the clocks and wanted to
go out. I managed to persuade him to wait, then slowly I did
to go back to bed. He had already forgotten, and was laughing showing me the right fire
that there was still in his room.

What is he preparing, great God, what is he preparing?

Now he was sitting in a corner of the room without saying a word,
as if under the impression of a narcotic. His doctor friend wanted
absolutely consult a specialist, but we dared not speak to
André. We agreed that he would be passed off as a journalist who
came to talk to him about his book.

He came. André was as if oblivious to what was going on around
him. He answered quietly and in monosyllables. The doctor did not linger
not. He took me aside, told me that his condition was very serious and the
disease already very advanced, that he was walking towards general paralysis.

--I know he got an anatomical injection, find out if
she was syphilitic.

--One of her teachers said she was, another claimed
opposite.

--Well, I will go to them myself: they must remember.

--And if it is general paralysis, is there any hope of curing it?

- No, none: there may be a remission of a few months, a year
perhaps ... but, afterwards, the evil resumes and continues its course until the
end.

I called for his mother, saying that Andre was sick. When i spoke to her
from the doctor:

--How did you get a doctor to come? but you are dangerous ...
a man delivered to doctors is a lost man, we heal everything
with Leroi purgatives and emetics ... Doctors are
ignorant.

--This doctor asked if the anatomical puncture was not
syphilitic...

- Yes, she was ... I had her urine tested.

--And he did not take care of himself? and you left this disease
poison him?

--He has taken a hundred doses of purgatives and emetics: no disease
resist this. He was healed. As for admitting that my son can
to go mad, no, our head is too well done.

`` How, madame, did you know that this injection was syphilitic and
you didn't tell me anything! And you wished I had children?
Ah! ...

A fierce hatred passed over his face.

--Oh! I would not have left it, even knowing it; we love each other
too completely not to accept anything from each other ...

A terrible uproar made us rush up the stairs.
It was André who had thrown down the shelves of his library; the
books lay on the ground jumbled up with planks and platters.

--Strangers have dared to sign my books, I will burn them and
have others printed, signed with my name.

And he sat down laughing.

Then she realized that something awful was going on with her
child, and she ran to the doctor.

                   * * * * *

... No hope of a cure, but every day you will see a
new progress in disease ... They are the masters, they will
get away from him. They are unable to cure it, so it will be
foreigners who will use their mercenary hands to handle this fine being ...
Ah! I will rather kill him, and me with him ... We will see if,
because we have not bowed to the law, I have no
rights ... How? fifteen years of love would give no rights, and
three minutes in front of the mayor would give them all ...
be able to treat it and keep it as long as possible ... None
means of cure, none ... So, in a while, André will be mad!
crazy !! ... And I know this, and I will witness this! ... Parents there
do not believe ... is it stupidity or vanity? ... vanity ... it cannot
to happen to them is good for others! ... Shameful disease ...
stupidity!! he was a virgin when he got that shot
anatomical...

Hence came his discouragement, his weakness to undergo
influences at odds with its nature. I have often wondered
how it was that it did not evolve any more, that it remained with the ideas
of 48, which had been instilled in him, a teenager ... Ah! my poor darling,
how he must have suffered - for this has been prepared for a long time - he who
thought he was going to write the most beautiful book that had ever been written! I the
see in front of the white paper, powerless to materialize his thoughts, his
dreams of a better, more harmonious world, made of love and mutual aid.
What utopias! but how beautiful this book would have been, for it would have put
all his exquisite sensitivity ...

And here it is ... lost ... and nothing, nothing to do ... Come on, Keetje, du
courage! swallow that one again ... Ah! this one is going to strangle me ...
but as long as he needs you you won't strangle yourself
not ... This snake will take a long time to pass, but you will put up with it:
what would become of him? ... He is well worth the little ones ...

Her mother told me she was going to take her to the country, that I couldn't
not accompany them, that she advised me not to say anything to André;
it could turn him on and hurt him a lot.

The next day he was sent away. I felt that she was taking it from me and that
I might not see him again. I had to go back to my house
that fortunately I had not yet moved. I walked through it, like
a wild beast, writing letter after letter to his mother, begging her to
let him take care of it. On the third day I received a telegram telling me
to join them.

He was in the garden. When he saw me, he said "han", took me by the hand
and left with me.

--They let you go, or did you escape?

Then, talking to himself:

--Keetje Oldema ... she was so pretty and so poor, and so poor,
he said, turning to me. They put her in jail.

--But I'm here, I'm not leaving.

- You will stay with me. What an idea to put you in jail, because I
am an anarchist ... But, you, you did nothing, it is because you are
poor...

I knew he had screamed night and day after me, believing that I was
imprisoned.

The father now accepted me straight away ... I'm sure it was
again the mother who had exaggerated everything, to intimidate André ... He was
agreed that I would settle down with him in the country, near the city
for the facilities. They, the parents, were too afraid of emotions.

I found, at the gates of Brussels, an old country house, at the
middle of a large garden surrounded by a wall, where I could leave him
complete freedom. He never wanted me, during his illness, or
Naatje that he often took for me, although she was dark. After
few days of vacation that the doctor had imposed on me and where he was
stayed with her, he got angry looking at my hair which had strong
whitened in the last days.

--How, I made you brown hair, and you are again
grey?...

He wanted to hit me, but he was so afraid of his gesture that he took me
hands.

- Come on, it's good, you at least put your pretty nose ...

In his runs around the house he took me by the hand when I
found me on his way, and, without a word, took me with him. When
he was restless, I slipped his arm under mine and, as we walked
in the garden, I gently sang the glory of the great writer André: this
still calmed him.

One day, he was lucid and realized his condition. It was excruciating;
he took his head in both hands and gasped:

--I'm going crazy, my brain capsizes, what's wrong? what is happening to me?
I can no longer work, no longer think, I do crazy things.
Help me, Keetje, tell me what's wrong.

- Nothing, dear, nothing, you are tired, you cannot work now,
that's all.

--Your face is too decomposed for it to be nothing; what is it?
tell me ... I'm going crazy ... if ... if ... I know it, I feel it.

He was trembling like the leaf and, with both hands on my shoulders, his
gaze questioned me, terrified. Then, like a hunted beast, he
looked around, still holding my shoulders.

- Where are we here? This is not our house ... Crazy! I'm going crazy,
and, you, what will become of you? I filed for you with the notary ... Crazy,
André is going crazy ... my brain, my brain ... crazy ... crazy ... crazy ...

He put his arms around me, and, his head on my chest, stammered:

- Crazy, André is crazy ...

I sat him down on the couch and knelt in front of him. Then i don't know
more what speech I held: I spoke, spoke, persuading him on all
the tones he had all his intelligence, but, apart from me, I
made the wish, if this return of consciousness could not be definitive,
that this gleam be extinguished so that he does not suffer any more.

Listening to me, the terrified expression slowly disappeared, to
make way, alas! to the most absolute error.

There were days when I thirsted to remember the André of old.
So I left the sick André with Naatje, and I ran to lock myself
in my room, and, with his portraits and his letters, I did it again.
We were walking in the forest, he spoke to me in his pretty voice
warm and clear, her beautiful gaze sought the answers in my eyes:
he was explaining to me, his big slender hands gesturing, how much he would be
easy to make mankind happy, and, when I didn't understand, it
would start again, saying he was explaining badly ... Then we would pick
flowers and brought to town immense bouquets of broom or
sainfoin. In winter we had fun throwing snowballs at each other,
and he laughed, his mouth wide open, and shielded himself with one arm.
figure.

And finished ... His beautiful voice, he no longer knows how to govern it, his gaze is
haggard, he moves on his legs ... However I would like to keep him, and
stay all my life next to him to take care of him ... as long as I
can keep it ... there were already some very painful things for
me, but, since he did not realize it, I accepted them: a
mother also has her child's diapers, and she has to do it too
eat ... as long as I can keep it ... But when the time came
gangrene!! and that I saw in the sore of the heel the bone, and in the sores
thighs strained veins and arteries from edge of the wound to
the other, like strings on a violin, so my head almost burst
also, and I wished that his martyrdom would end.

I asked the doctor where he came from that many lunatics hated
especially their wife.

--André, when his mother comes to see him, doesn't seem to realize
of his presence, but all his gentle and kind gestures go to me: me
alone, I know how to calm him down.

--The insane, madame, remember mechanically, and this
predilection is proof that there were never any clashes or things
painful between you. Those who are bad were already bad before their
disease, but then they had the reason to control themselves. At André,
nothing similar, everything indicates a fundamentally good being.

It was a great consolation to me to know that at least the memory,
even unconscious, of our love suggested only gestures and
looks of affection.

However, every day, as the doctor had warned me, I
saw the evil progress, to the most complete imbalance, where it
no longer had any control over his functions and actions. But,
even then his hands were still reaching out to me.

None of his friends ever came to see him or asked for his
new; the rare acquaintances that I sometimes met me
said that I had no right to annihilate myself, that I had to
myself; others made me understand that I had to be very dry
to witness this decline, that they would die of it; others, that I
should take nurses, that it was better for the patient, and
that at least I would not sacrifice myself in vain ...

Nurses, I had tried at the beginning, when I didn't know
where I was going to find myself, but I had come across bullies who
wanted to rule my sweet lamb: I had flanked them to the door.
As for me ... I had had his beautiful days of youth and love, and,
now that he had lost everything, I should have left him to
mercenaries, I should have asked these indifferent people for some money
to do what I couldn't do with all my love and
all my gratitude; I should have let this delicate being handle,
in ways that remained aristocratic, by Flemish peasants who
leave the plow to become hospital servants and, after
six months, enticed by the gain, place themselves as nurses ... Ah! no!
rather stay there ...

Her mother was six in six months, also because her sensitivity in
suffered too much; her husband was ill, and she told me one day
that she would have preferred that André died before her husband, "for
money matters ”.

--For he has no doubt given you all the fortune he will inherit from his
dad...

- I do not know, madame; André said he made a deposit for me.

--And you want me to believe that you don't know how much you
given! Let me see this will, I'll tell you if it's valid.

--André told me he's at a notary.

- So it is seriously done ... and at which notary?

--I do not know.

It lasted four years, with gangrene for the last six months. The
doctor told me that nowhere were the wounds so good
neat and bandaged.

His father died in the meantime. His mother did not come for the last few
six months.

When I had buried André, I ordered the funeral and I was alone
with Naatje to bury him. I did not think it necessary to warn who
that it was. For four years no one had inquired about him: the
modesty forbade me to disturb them.

Now I no longer knew ... Was I in sorrow? ... there was so
long since he was dead ... I was stupid ... I had no more
memory ... I no longer slept ... I was throwing up all the time ... I was
especially insensitive ... My lawyer arranged my affairs. Doctor
sent me to Switzerland.

I never saw André's mother again.




The four months I was in Switzerland I spent almost all the time
in bed. What little I could see of the country horrified me: always a
mountain in front of you ... During the return trip, once in
Belgium, I did not look away from the door: I could not
enough to satisfy myself with our little white houses with red roofs, with
our church spiers, our fields cut like cakes, our
meadows, woods, wide horizons, the tasty quality of the
greenery and silvery, enveloping light ... Ah! no, I'm from
North: I don't need me, neither from Switzerland, nor from the South, I don't breathe there
literally not comfortable.

Back in Brussels, I was lost there. I had no one there.
I wandered the streets where I had lived and where André had lived; i'm there
returned like a dog to his old lodge. It seemed to me that these
neighborhoods, these houses, the people, however, must have adopted a
little. Court Mountain was demolished; the university, where I was going
to wait for him, was in a low bottom; the whole neighborhood
was stoned: no more streets in this lower part of town, where I could
orient me. Where was it then that I had walked with André, full
of youth and pride at having been able to fix a man like him? Ah, God,
I no longer have a point of reference, even to cry there ... I am leaving, I
go to Amsterdam: maybe there I'll be able to rebuild my life.

I settled down on the Canal des Empereurs, in a furnished apartment,
I beat the city all over the place. I went through the alleys and on
the stinking canals of the Jordaan, seeing all the dead ends, all the
cellars, all the huts we had lived in: most were
closed, with a sign on the door: “Uninhabitable for insalubrity”;
others had been demolished for the same reason.

Then what? ... which me lived there? not the me of now ...
the same joys and the same pains would still cause me the same
impressions? The Keetje of then, the Keetje of twenty years ago, and the
Today's Keetje, what did they have in common? ... and which one was
the most miserable? ...

The new city does not interest me. I walk tirelessly on
the quays of the old town, leaning against the trees so that I can
look at the top of the houses. I am afraid, by backing up, of falling into the water,
which shows that I am no longer from the city: when I was
when I was little, I played knucklebones on the granite slabs that border the
canals. As I go back and forth every day in front of the same
houses, maids call their mistresses to show me. The old
gentleman with the old lady get up from their armchairs to
look, and I see in their mouths that they say to themselves:
this foreign lady ... "The young maid, whom I took into my service,
also comes to tell me how much the suppliers inform themselves how
eats, drinks and speaks the foreign lady ... that's it: foreign
all over! I have no roots anywhere, and no one to care
me...

Ah! I'm not staying here, I'm leaving for Paris: this center of art and
aspirations for the best must offer compensation.

Marthe was delighted to see me. I lunched at her place; she me
spoke of his successes and his troubles. We drove to
Redfern, at her hairdresser, then she dropped me off at the Tuileries. It
had so much to do ... and didn't even ask if I was leaving
Paris or if I was going to stay there.

I gorged myself on the Louvre, I gorged myself on the French, the Russian ballets,
and even Music Halls ... Then I returned alone to my hotel: not one
cat, not a dog, to come to me.

This life will lead me to suicide; I do however have pensions
now ... Ah! I would like to have been born in a small village that I
would never have left, and where everyone would be my cousin. I do not like
than the figures that I have always seen: I can read them, I believe that
I am something to them, and they are very much to me. I'm always
proud when I am treated familiarly and asked for a favor:
so it is that I am not indifferent to them, not a stranger
mostly...

... I keep seeing our little children again, when we
belonged to the same nest and were one with me ... then
André, who came into my life as Prince Charming, whom I never
I believed to exist only in the images: it illuminated my life, as of a
torch still illuminating, and showing the way to follow ... Then
Wimpie, with her beautiful eyes, clear forehead and big little ones
legs: he was like our children to me, but with the idea in addition to
perfect through study, and free from need ... And Suzette,
the adorable pussy licking me like one of her youngsters, and whose
eyes of gold colored with emerald and the tawny, silky dress attracted me
like a precious object full of mystery ...

All missing! How and with what to replace them? They were my soul:
do we replace his soul! ... It is certainly not among these people
in a hurry jostling here that I will find no interest for me ...
it's like a surging current, and a bus would pass over me
that he could not turn away.

I'm going! ... where? ...




Five years later ...

The wandering life had become odious to me. One summer I had failed here,
village lost in the heather. The land had nothing to do with it. I have
bought, on a hill, with the open valley in front, and the pine groves
behind, two hectares of meadows, surrounded by wheat fields. My
piece of land was divided by a ten-meter-wide massif, where the
fifty-year-old holly and large oaks intertwine. I practiced there
openings.

I built in the middle of the field, facing the valley, a small house
in brick, whitewashed, with large windows and orange shutters.
I left the whole garden in front of the house uncovered, I sowed
large lawns with baskets of roses; behind the house and the
massive, an orchard bordered by flower beds of dahlias, sunflowers and
asters. Next to the orchard, I planted a small birch wood,
crossed winding paths. I closed the whole thing with iron wires, and the
wheat fields where the peasant works and the meadows where the
cows up to my fence, are like an extension of my
garden.

I settled there one spring with a little maid from the country to whom
I'm learning cooking, Dick, my shepherd from Mechelen, and two little ones
Brussels griffons.

I am forty-five years old. For four years that I've been here, my pains
have left me; I gained ten kilos, I weigh now
sixty. I have a very fresh complexion, my hair is all white,
but I assure you it's not ugly, wavy white hair.

There are no bourgeois in my village, all farmers; the
brewer is mayor; two grocery stores and two inns.

In the morning, I take a long walk with my dogs through the woods,
or in the heather, or in the ponds. When I come home, Caroline me
asks, before serving, to taste the dish she has prepared for me.
While I have dinner, she tells me the news.

--Madame, Jef's wife came to ask if you could
cure: he is stiff with rheumatism and bellows night and day. The doctor
saw it five days ago and said it had to go by itself.
He hasn't been working for a week.

--But I'm not a healer.

`` Go ahead anyway, madame.

After lunch, I take a glove of horsehair and the jug of brandy
of Hasselt "of the old System", and I go to Jef.

--Ah! God of God, madame, ah! name of God, with your permission, that
I am in pain...

--How did it come about?

--I was sweating, and I put myself in the draft:
it was delicious, but the next day I couldn't get up.

`` Come on, Anneke, give me another woolen blanket and help me.

I uncover Jef's torso and, with the alcohol-soaked horsehair glove, I
trotting, in front and behind, until it is fiery red.

--Madame, what a pity ... this good juniper, to waste it like this ... If
I drank it instead ...

--My old man, you will not have a drop in it; but for
the outside, I do not look there.

--It's a sin really, madame, it will do me more good inside.

The guy has a look so sincere that I am touched.

- No, you won't.

And I rub.

--Now the covers. Come on, Anneke, let's swaddle him.

I roll it up in three blankets, which I tie with
safety.

- There you are, now you have to sweat.

I take the jug and go to the door. His mournful gaze attaches to
the jug and said naively: "What, she's going to take it away without me
give a drop ... "

- Come on, Anneke, pass me a glass, I will pour it a little: but
it is to sweat better.

"Yes, it's the better to sweat," he says, like a child.

I give him a good glass of it.

He sweated and the next day returned to work.

                   * * * * *

Another day:

--Madame, the little woman, in childbirth of her eighth, is up. This is
the third day, and she is already milking the cows, but she is not
good at all.

I go there and the force layer. I undress the little one and send the
kids outside, to let the mother sleep.

                   * * * * *

- Madam, this gentleman and this lady have returned again; they say that,
in the village, they have been assured that you are not traveling.

--Ah! well, Caroline, if they still insist, loose Dick.

- Here, yes, I had not thought of it ...

                   * * * * *

--Mrs! Mrs! I succeeded! ...

It's Caroline who comes running, her eyes blazing, her lips wet,
its black curls in the wind.

--Ah! Let's see.

--He climbed, high like that, he is golden and shiny, as varnished, and
I did it on my own.

--Ah! he is beautiful, really ... he is a great cook ...
beautiful cake with corinths!

--I did exactly as you explained to me, and there you have it ...
women of the village say that I will be able to cook for everyone
days, but never pastry.

- Well, you will show them that they are wrong. Sometimes when he
will be cooled, we will cut it in half, we will divide one half into
three parts, which you will take to Anneke, to Siska, and to Wantje,
to take with their coffee; and they will see that you can do
something other than everyday cooking. The other half, we him
will honor this afternoon with tea. This cake is your
masterpiece, Caroline, and you can be proud of it.

                   * * * * *

On Saturday afternoon, there is no class. So they send me a
half a dozen children, with heads covered with scabs and lice. I
cut the hair in places, to be able to clean it better, and,
soaped, I wash it, I braid the remaining hair, and I explain
to the little ones how their mothers must undo the braids the next day
and fluff the hair to hide the empty places ...

- You see, thus ... and one will not notice anything, at the church.

                   * * * * *

At the beginning of my installation, I used to go to town from time to time
to hear a concert, or I bought a beautiful book. But the country has me
so penetrated, that I now live by its perfume, its
atmosphere, its light, the intense life of its fields, its
pine groves, its heather.

A walk with my dogs, in the ponds, makes me see all the Turner again
from London.

Concerts! ... The song of these birds, there in the massif, isn't it?
not Haydn? is it not the same fresh and spontaneous candor? ...
rainy and stormy nights, where my little house is shaken up and down
low, don't I hear the Valkyries calling out to each other with laughter
strident, and pass over my house with _houhou_
deafening? Don't I hear neighs, roars of
beasts being pursued, howls of terror and joy? ...
a treat that these fierce nights? Whether the best clarinet or the
best flute so try to play, as the wind plays on the roof in
running around the fireplace and not rushing into it!

Read more books ... And the dramas that happen in the grass where,
lying on my stomach, I follow the insects that chase each other,
steal, murder and love each other with passion ... In the woods, I see
adorable and fierce things ... At the end of the summer, when I get
walks in the pine groves, the young rabbits who still ignore
the man and the result of a gunshot, lie down on a small
pile of grass and look at me naively. But the approach of my dogs
frightens and they run away, leaving a very hot little hollow. As
I prevent my dogs from chasing them, they throw themselves while sniffing
on the small hollow and ravage it with their paws.

Then, isn't it a page of poetry that these little flowers
close the days when there is no sun, as if then life
was not worth living ... And this old household of crows passing by
diagonal across the garden, every day at the same time, as if
were going home, after hours of work ... and with what
logical intonations they call to each other, while flying ...
certainly no household so united throughout the village.

I've only learned to read and see and listen since I was
here and that the voices of men who never agree with me no longer reach me. I
tells me stories. Afterwards, I repeat them to Caroline, like the
having read in books, and I show him books of flowers and
birds and the Latin text that I tell him is the story that I gave him
story. Caroline makes a very curious audience: she is not surprised
when I give flowers a character or feelings, according to their
shape and color, or when I identify the two crows with people.
She's not like the lady who got shocked because I said, "My
son ”to my Malinois shepherd.

`` Let us see, dear friend, this soulless brute, call him so!

Dick, no soul! ... What heresy!

                   * * * * *

The nights are heavenly in my garden scented with the scent of roses
and pine scents. In the holly of the massif, the nightingales
sing: I have two concerts per evening, one as soon as it gets dark,
the other after an hour of interruption, which continues late into the night.
I am on a lounge chair in the middle of a lawn, surrounded by
roses; the sky is pure, but the stars far away; warm scents to me
thrill with well-being. My hauntings are stories of happiness
and beauty, and, instead of obsessing over ragged visions
haves, tortured by misery, I see woods with gigantic trees,
with extensive and tasty foliage, I see superb horned beasts
in meadows dotted with flowers, and peasants mowing wheat
soft and double grains.

And the mornings ... What glory of light extends over these heather, under
the dew! ... And in my garden, the bees on the flowers
buzz, and fairy tales whisper in my ears!

... I would like to live here, old, very old ... So it exists
all the same, happiness ... I'm never sad again ... I see
well still from time to time a toddler playing on the grass, but
the image smiles and joins there another image of a man - he has his
frock coat of always. They both smile at me, with a
expression of infinite softness on the face, and make me the gesture of not
not get up, to enjoy, to enjoy the joy that surrounds me ...



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KEETJE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one - the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by US copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away - you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by US copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg "), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark / copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1 C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation "or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  whatsoever restrictions. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by US copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg "associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII "or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation. "

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s / he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by US copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund "described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
place of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501 (c) (3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
US federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($ 1 to $ 5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. US laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the US unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
editing.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
